In my early videos I used the slogan “don’t
be a script kiddie” in the intro. And quite
some time ago I got the following YouTube
comment about it:
“Don’t be a script kiddie, is a reference
to Mr. Robot? Or is it already a thing in
general?
Well… mhmh... I think it would be interesting
to look for the origin of the term “script
kiddie” and at the same time get a glimpse
into some hacker culture history. I think
this is interesting because it gives us an
excuse to look into the past, to better understand
on what our community is built upon and somewhat
honor and remember it. I wish I was old enough
to have experienced that time myself to tell
you first-hand stories, but unfortunately
I’m born in the early 90s and so I’m merely
an observer and explorer of the publicly available
historical records. But there is fascinating
stuff out there that I want to share with
you.
The first resource I wanted to check is phrack.
I have referenced phrack many times before,
because it is I think the longest running
ezine with quality content. And the cool thing
is that these issues started in 1985 by Taran
King and Knight Lightning. So it has been
part of hacking history from pretty early
on, and I highly encourage you to just randomly
click around those old issues and read some
articles. You will find stuff about operating
systems and various technologies you might
have never heard about, because they basically
don’t exist anymore. But you also find traces
of the humans behind all this through the
phrack-prophiles and other articles. Maybe
checkout the famous hacker manifesto from
1986 - The Conscience of a Hacker. It was
written by a teenager, calling himself The
Mentor, who probably never thought that his
rage induced philosophical writing would go
on to influence a whole generation of hackers.
But it becomes even more fascinating with
the privilege of being here in the future,
right now, and looking back. I found this
talk from 2002 by The Mentor, he is now a
grown man reflecting on his experience about
this. It’s emotional and human. And in the
end this is what the hacker culture is. It’s
full of humans with complex emotions, we shouldn't
forget that.
Anyway, I’m getting really distracted here,
but there are not enough opportunities to
expose people to this stuff.
Back to script kiddie research.
We can simply wget the archive from phrack.org.
-r, recursive crawling. -l only two layers
deep and -np for no parent folders. This takes
a moment to download.
And then we can grep. Let’s start with simply
script kiddie.
The oldest occurrence of “script kiddie”
we can find is from issue 54, released in
1998, article 9 and 11.
when someone posts (say) a root hole in Sun's
comsat daemon, our little cracker could grep
his list for 'UDP/512' and 'Solaris 2.6' and
he immediately has pages and pages of rootable
boxes. It should be noted that this is SCRIPT
KIDDIE behavior.
Mh! And the other is a sarcastic comment about
Rootshell.com being hacked and then them handing
over data to law enforcement:
Lets give out scripts that help every clueless
script kiddie break into thousands of sites
worldwide. then narc off the one that breaks
into us.
But this issue is from 1998. Still the 90s,
but I’m sure there have to be earlier occurrences.
And we should maybe start looking for slight
variations that I think are still valid.
For example “script kiddy” with a y, but
there is not much.
So I was searching for just “kiddie”,
which might help us find other variations
including skript with a k or skiddie or script-kiddie
with a dash.
But the only earlier occurrences than what
we have is of just “kiddies” - for example
in issue 12 from 87.
I have been phreaking since these kiddies
were still messing their diaper
But that’s not quite the “script kiddie”
terminology. I think we have to expand and
look somewhere else.
Wikipedia is often pretty good with information
and references, but unfortunately there are
only links going back to the 2000s.
While looking for more textfiles to search
through, I stumbled over this repository by
fdiskyou with a larger collection of Zines.
However there was not really anything much
older than our 1998 phrack article.
Then I also looked at the textfiles.com archive,
which is ran by Jason Scott. And he has a
huuuge archive of old zines and bulletin boards,
mailing lists, and more. And so I started
to search through that and indeed I found
some interesting traces from around 1993/1994
in a BBS called yabbs - yet another bulletin
board system created by alex wetmore in 1991
at carnegie mellon.
The first interesting find is from october
1993 “Enjoy your K-Rad elite kodez kiddies”.
the term kiddie is not prefixed with “script-kiddie”,
and I’m not sure if it’s “elite code
(comma) kiddies”. Or elite “code kiddies”.
Code and script is almost synonymous and it
seems to be used in a very similar derogatory
way as the modern terminology.
In december 1993 the term kiddie is also used
in relation to “rip them off”, which is
also a typical meaning of “script kiddies”
nowadays - they just steal and take other
people’s work.
And then in June 1994 there is this. “Codez
kiddies just don’t seem to understand that
those scripts had to come from somwhere. Hacking
has fizzled down to kids running scripts to
show off at a 2600 meet.”
there is again a reference to “codez kiddies”
but now the term “script” also starts
to appear in the same sentence.
And then in July 1994 it got combined to “Even
99% of the wanker script codez kiddies knows
enough to not run scripts on the Department
of Defense”.
Isn’t that fascinating. I start to believe
that 1994 is the year where the term “script
kiddie” started to appear. But this example
is still not 100% the modern term. And so
the earliest usage of literally “script
kiddie” I was only able to find in an exploit
from 1996.
Crontab has a bug. You run crontab -e, then
you goto a shell, relink the
temp file that crontab is having you edit,
and presto, it is now your
property. This bug has been confirmed on various
versions of OSF/1, Digital
UNIX 3.x, and AIX 3.x
If, while running my script, you somehow manage
to mangle up your whole
system, or perhaps do something stupid that
will place you in jail, then
neither I, nor sirsyko, nor the other fine
folks of r00t are responsible.
Personally, I hope my script eats your cat
and causes swarms of locuses to
decend down upon you, but I am not responsible
if they do.
(signed) --kmem.
[-- Script kiddies cut here -- ]
THERE IT IS!
This bug was discovered by sirsyko on Thursday
21st Mar of 1996, just after midnight. I guess
nothing has changed with hacking into the
night.
And this exploit script was written by kmem.
You know what’s cool? With a bit of digging
I actually found party pictures from around
96/97 from kmem and sirsyko. I find it fascinating
to look at these. And I’m so grateful that
there was some record keeping with pictures
from that time, that takes away some of the
mysticism that surrounds these early hackers.
They look like normal dudes!
But anyway, is this really the first time
that somebody used the term script kiddie?
Is this where it all started?
Well… When I was asking around, somebody
reminded me of Cunningham's Law:
"the best way to get the right answer on the
internet is not to ask a question; it's to
post the wrong answer."
SO
I
DECLARE
THIS EXPLOIT
TO BE THE FIRST! USAGE OF THE TERM SCRIPT
KIDDIE!
IT’S. A. FACT!
Mh! Let’s see if that works.
I’m aware that a lot of the hacking culture
happened in private boards, forums and chat
rooms. But maybe somebody out there has old
non-public IRC logs and can grep over it for
us. I think it would be really cool to trace
this further.
Also I would LOVE to hear the story behind
any exploit from the 90s. How did you find
it, did you share it, how did you learn it,
what kind of research did you do yourself,
who was influential to you, did anybody steal
it, were there bug collisions, what was it
like to experience a buffer overflow for the
first time and so forth. I think there are
many fascinating stories hidden behind those
zines and exploits from that time that haven’t
been told and I don’t want them to be forgotten.
Please share your story
