In the previous video I showed you a dumb
design decision of a Guild Wars 2 Trading
Bot author, who decided it was a good idea
to leak the API keys from all bot users.
These API keys can be used with the Guild
Wars 2 API to get all character information.
I have written a small script that has collected
data on all active bot users along with their
wealth, for the past three months.
And so I wanna have a look at this data and
also talk about the threat model of botting
in MMORPGs
Before we get into the data, let’s talk
about botting itself.
I try to approach this topic as if I would
design an MMORPG and I’m well aware of the
threat that somebody could hack the client
or automate and bot certain aspects of the
game.
For me MMORPGs have two major concerns they
need to control in order to have a healthy
game.
One is the player satisfaction.
This is purely subjective, it’s about feelings
players have that are often completely separate
from reality.
And the other one is keeping inflation of
the ingame currency under control.
If you ever played a game with rapid inflation,
it’s basically unplayable as a new player
and it’s just a terrible experience.
And there are many many game design decisions
that you can make that affect these things.
For example a very typical thing games do
is to have a gold sink.
That means there are very expensive luxury
items that just pull out masses of currency
or items to fight against inflation.
Items can become character bound so they are
removed from the economy and much more.
So what does this have to do with botting.
So when most people imagine botting in an
MMORPG game, they imagine bots that run around,
kill monsters to level or collect items and
gold.
So why is this bad for agame?
First, with each kill, gold or items are generated
out of thin air.
More gold available in the economy, can lead
to a higher inflation.
And because botting can be scaled to hundreds,
thousands or even way more, this can really
destroy the economy.
This is the main reason why botting is so
bad for a game.
Another issue is, that when regular players
encounter botters, it has a negative emotional
effect on them.
They feel cheated, maybe even their kills
get snatched away, they can’t buy stuff
anymore because of inflation and they can’t
find real players to chat and go on adventures
together.
So if we design a game to defend against this
threat, what can we do?
Should we invest into obfuscating the client,
making the network protocol super complex,
implement or buy scanning solutions that behave
like anti-virus software trying to identify
bots or hacking tools through heuristics?
But those are all terrible solutions, because
they are expensive and ineffective.
A dedicated botter can always bypass those
locally running scanning tools.
It just slows them down and maybe prevents
simple people from doing it, but professionals,
that earn money from botting, they will find
ways around it.
Much more elegant solutions are solving this
through game design.
For example Guild Wars 2 doesn’t have a
concept of kill, experience, loot or resource
stealing.
Everything is shared.
So players wont have a bad experience with
bots stealing their kills.
You can also design your game and server logic
in a way that you completly don’t trust
the client.
For example let’s say you have a dungeon
and at the end is a reward.
Instead of spawning the reward chest at the
start and having closed doors preventing access,
you can have a mission timer or different
checks before the server spawns it at the
end.
Thus if sb has a client-side wallhack or even
control over the communication protocol they
can’t just access the chest rightaway.
You can also implement more complicated boss
fight mechanics that require dodging and positioning,
so that bots have to be really really smart
in order to farm it.
You can also make a lot of resources account
bound, so that a lot of the good loot can’t
even be traded or sold by the bot owners.
You can also have instanced MMOs, because
then bots can do everything without ever being
seen from players, thus it helps against a
bad perception of the game.
It’s kind of fun trying to think of systems
that make bots less effective to protect the
game, isn’t it?
But what about a trading bot.
Because this is a little bit different.
I claimed earlier that the ingame economy,
mainly the inflation is a crucial part to
keep a game healthy.
So how does a Guild Wars 2 Trading bot affect
the game?
First I have to explain how the tradingpost
works.
When you have an item you can list it for
a price.
Listing an item costs 5% of the price you
choose.
That is paid right away.
Then if somebody buys the item, another 10%
of the gold is taken away.
Basically you have a 15% sales tax on each
trade.
And placing a buy order does not cost anything.
So this means that a trading bot instead of
printing ingame money.
It actually removes gold from the economy.
15% at a time.
So a trading bot is in a weird way actually
HELPING to fight inflation.
Also I would claim, that the casual regular
player, likes to buy items when they need
it from the trading post, and sell items right
away to sb who offered to buy it.
That’s not the most efficient way, but the
most comfortable way.
And so a bot, who is constantly trying to
overbid on items so they get buy orders filled
raise the price a casual player can sell an
item for right away, and at the same time
try to undercut when listing the item, so
their sell listing is sold quicker.
Which pushes the price down for casual players
that just want to buy an item.
So it even has another positive effect.
However there are also two major negative
points.
A trading bpt is competing with all the players
who would like to maximize their profits,
or engage in trading too.
The undercutting and overbidding minimizes
the profit a regular player can have.
It also lowers the bots own profit, but a
bot can obviously do a lot more trades than
a human and can thus justify lower profit
margins.
And another issue is, that if players feel
like there are bots trading it can have a
very negative emotional effect.
A feeling of unfairness and so forth - even
though maybe objectively a trading bot is
not bad, regular players will not see it that
way.
So I believe a trading bot is unfair, though
it’s not bad or dangerous for the game,
as long as players don’t see them.
So let’s have a look at the data I have
collected.
I’m using a jupyter notebook to work with
the data and used it to create all the graphs.
The code is terrible, please ignore it.
I have not included the API keys so you can’t
find out which players were doing this, but
you can find all graphs in the description
below and so you can have a look yourself.
First of all, over the roughly three months
of collecting data, I have seen 94 unique
Guild Wars 2 API keys.
So I guess almost 100 people have downloaded
the bot, executed it and entered their API
key.
However when you look at the graphs you will
see that many have not actively used the bot.
Next let’s look at the activity graph.
At the bottom you can see the time span of
the data collection.
It started on 12 of november and went up to
the 7th of februrary.
My crawler checked the API every hour, so
each point represents a bot being registered
online and having some sell or buy data.
You might wonder why there are only 76 bots
and not 94.
That’s because 18 people basically didn’t
do ANYTHING.
These 76 however started the bot for a brief
period.
But even though they used it, there are still
several that were basically never reallya
ctive.
So for example user number 72 downloaded and
ran the bot for a couple of hours on the 23.
November.
After after that, never again.
In contrast to that user 25 has basically
a bot running 24/7 for the whole period.
BTW this gap over here was my fault, my crawler
died and I didn’t realize it quickly enough.
And then there is user 55, who used it fairly
actively, but then stopped in december, maybe
went home for christmas without their PC and
then restarted the bot again when they returned
in january.
These graphs tell a lot of interesting stories.
Now let’s have a look at individual bot
graphs.
I think number 25 is awesome, it’s a really
active bot.
I think it’s actually the most active one
that I have recorded.
So You can see here dots with several colors.
Orange is the gold they have in their wallet
or inventory.
Blue is the gold trapped in items they have
listed for sale.
So blue is a theoretic gold value they would
get if they would sell the items.
But now that I think about it again, I think
I forgot to deduct the 10% trading post tax
from that.
Anyway, blue should be a bit lower overall.
Red are the buy orders they have, so that’s
money that is waiting in the tradingpost for
somebody who sells the item for this price.
And black is the “net worth”, basically
it’s just the sum of gold, value of the
items listed for sale and the buy orders.
It’s the theoretic gold wealth of this account
at that moment in time.
So if we look at the start of this graph we
can see that the bot has constantly 400 to
1300 with up to 1700g in buy orders.
So hoping to get cheap items.
And blue are the items being sold.
So these items wait for a buyer.
And as you can see their price is always going
up and down meaning that new items are being
listed for sale and that people buy items.
Now I think that there is always a dip down
on weekends?
Which could mean that because on the weekend
more players are playing, more items are being
bought from this player.
So the money in listed items goes down.
But I can’t really explain myself those
big jumps.
So black is the overall “net worth” and
I think there are clear upward trends visible
here, with around maybe 750 to almost 1000g
per week?
But remember a lot of the wealth is kept in
items that might never get sold, so it’s
not all just raw gold.
But here with those big jumps I think maybe
my calculation fails a bit and actually the
user cancelled all buy orders and so forth
and then moved gold away.
Also there is a fairly sudden drop in value
of listed items, so maybe the person even
cancelled a lot of listed items and relisted
them lower or just outright sold them to the
highest bidder?
Maybe?
Well i don’t know, speculating here.
This trend here I think is awesome.
The listed items are slowly being sold off,
which increases the available gold.
However the gold is immediatly put back into
ordering new items, so more and more gold
is now in the ordered items.
Overall, because by selling those items and
ordering new ones, the bot made a profit and
thus the overall net worth is slowly increasing.
But the trading strategy during this time
is also ineffective, because ideally the listings
wouldn’t go down, they should be at least
stable or rising with the wealth.
But like I said, that’s a very active bot
and probably the most successful one.
We can also use gw2efficiency with the API
key to spy a little bit what this player traded.
So here they are, these are the secret items
that apparently are very profitable to trade.
The most money was apparently made with the
black Poly-luminescent trinket.
The War God skins are also good.
BTW if you are wondering why the listings
are flatlining starting around the 9th of
january, this can be seen also on other graphs.
Unfortunately this is an issue with the guild
wars 2 API.
The listings are not updated, so the data
there is faulty.
Another very active bot, number 3, seems to
be less successful.
Here the networth is pretty constant.
So kinda useless to let the bot run.
Bot 30 looks awesome, but don’t get fooled
by the slope and look at the y axis steps.
Here the bot started with around 200g and
made maybe 500g in about 3 weeks.
That’s also not very great.
And those drops look really like the person
pulled out winnings into another account.
Unfortunately this user’s API key is invalid.
Maybe they got banned?
Or maybe they just removed the API key because
they stopped using the bot.
So is this bot worth it?
I’d say clearly no.
A lot of the graphs are pretty much just a
flat line, so they users don’t choose good
items to trade.
And you have to include the electricity cost,
hardware cost and game key cost PLUS the subscription
for the bot.
I think it’s a complete waste of money and
is better spent on buying gem cards.
Also should the average Guild Wars 2 player
be outraged over these unfair bots?
No, absolute not.
Those are small fish, they don’t really
make a lot of gold, always risk getting banned
and it’s just a handful of people.
This is not a problem you should worry about
and like I outlined earlier I don’t think
it has any negative effects on to the game.
And as long as you don’t cause an unjustified
player uprising, this is just fine.
Btw.
if sb from ArenaNet wants the API keys to
hand out some 7 day warning bans, send me
an email.
