If you follow me on twitter you have seens
some tweets about the riscure embedded hardware
CTF that has been running for around 3 months.
The CTF is over now and I have already prepared
several video writeups of the challenges that
I have solved and they are going to be released
over the next weeks and months.
In this video here I wanna talk a little bit
about my experience with it and a little recap.
So it all started last year when riscure announced
the second round of their embedded hardware
ctf.
To enter the competition you had to reverse
engineer a very very simple crackme, which
you could have easily done when you follow
my videos.
They were preparing arduino nano boards to
be shipped to every participant.
So we all got a free boards.
But they replaced the standard arduino bootloader
with their own custom one.
The bootloader is the part that is responsible
for stuff like making it easy to flash your
own code on it.
They did that, because they didn’t want
to distribute binaries that could be easily
reverse engineered instead of having to interact
with the board.
It also allowed them to have unique flags
for every participant.
So to work on a challenge you chose one from
this beautiful map, in an area that you want
to try out.
I for example started with the first crypto
challenge.
You get a little bit of text and a file to
download.
That file is actually the encrypted challenge
code.
You could then flash this encrypted code onto
the board, exactly like you would flash regular
arduino code on a normal board, just in this
case, the bootloader would decrypt the file
and then flash the actual code.
And then it was just fair game.
Find the flag.
How I approached the challenges and what I
learned along the way and how I solved them
will be covered in the upcoming videos.
Also I spend waaaaay to much money on equipment
I might never use again.
I’m sure riscure would have preferred I
spend it on them.
But I was really excited about this CTF and
wanted to do some hardware stuff.
But my bad conscience is hunting me.
Anyway.
fast forward to end of February 2017, the
CTF is over.
As you can see I was not able to compete with
the top ones.
Look at this points difference.
I actually kinda only solved the easy ones,
but I learned a lot.
On my profile you can see which challenges
I solved when.
This will also be the order of the videos
that will come out, so you can experience
the CTF from my perspective from start to
finish.
You can also see that I have not consistently
played and obviously now I regret that.
I mean I was busy, or just lazy, but I think
I missed out on some good challenges.
Let’s also have a look at which challenges
were solved by how many people.
As you can see I basically covered all the
simple ones.
They are mostly challenges that don’t really
have anything to do with the fact that it’s
an embedded device, they could have just been
regular CTF challenges, and I guess that made
it a lot easier to approach.
Though I did not solve one of these apparently
easier challenges, and that is Impostor, I
did not start doing that one, because I was
hanging out on the IRC channel of the CTF
and heard people raging over it.
Not because it was a bad challenge, just because
it was apparently really hard.
And I think it shows, that generally more
people have good reversing skills than there
are people with good hardware experience,
at least in the CTF community.
The most fun and educational challenges for
me, and the ones I’m really looking forward
to show you all, were the ones where you really
had to do some hardware stuff.
So whac the mole was great, and I have have
some fun fails to tell you about piece of
scake.
And I think the coolest challenge of the ones
I have solved, not because it was new or creative,
just because I have actually never done it
myself and it’s so magical, was the Fiesta
challenge.
If you are a software person, that will blow
your mind.
So overall, this CTF was a huge success.
The organisation was awesome.
The timeframe with the roughly 3 months were
perfect.
There were no big issues on the system or
hardware side.
I think riscure really deserves huge respect
spending quite a lot of money on running this,
and obviously the biggest thanks goes to the
challenge creators and the riscure employees
who have been hanging out on their free time
on IRC and were super helpful.
It was just a really really great experience
overall.
And I absolutely can’t wait for a riscure
embedded hardware CTF round 3.
This was just solid.
The only criticism I have is that some challenges
were relying a little bit too much of guessing
or generally knowing exactly what it is about.
CTF challenges are designed best when you
could approach them without knowing exactly
what’s going on and there is enough information
given or discoverable to piece together the
puzzle and progress and figure out what it
is about.
But that is criticism on a high level.
Designing good CTF challenges is really hard,
and overall they have been great.
But I wouldn’t mind if they improve on it.
And another small thing is, that I didn not
want to try hardware related things until
the last 3 weeks, because I was scared of
accidentally destroying the board.
Because if you brick it or fry it, it’s
game over.
You couldn’t use your own arduino board.
Though, no idea how that could be solved.
Maybe next time they could sell the challenge
boards, so you could order a bunch at the
beginning, or get another one if you destroy
it.
I don’t know.
Anyway, you probably think now: “damn, why
did I miss this.
This sounds awesome”.
And if you don’t think that, leave an subscribe
to some kali metasploit tutorial channel,
you are wrong here.
Just kidding.
Stay here.
I’m have to try everything to manipulate
you into actually learning something cool.
Well.
Lucky for you, riscure is slowly releasing
all the challenges unencrypted, which means
you can load them onto an arduino nano board
with the regular arduino bootloader.
And those arduino boards are really not that
expensive.
So if you want to follow along with the videos,
attempt some challenges yourself, or just
want to learn a bit more about electronics
and build a fun little project blinking an
LED, you should get one.
For the easy challenges no other hardware
like a soldering iron or an oscilloscope is
not needed.
They are only software based.
If of course you do want to learn more about
hardware security, then you need some equipment,
and that’s not cheap.
A binary ninja license is a lot cheaper than
hardware.
Hint hint.
I did get one email asking me what this thing
is in a previous video.
It’s a multimeter.
And I realised, maybe not many people know
really anything about electronics.
I don’t know how much that is covered in
school or physics class.
Or have had a small electronics learning kit
as a child.
So I’m wondering if I should do a video
on the basics like transistors, and resistors,
and current and voltage.
At least so you understand a basic digital
circuit.
I mean, I don’t know much beyond that either.
But let me know if you need that or if that
would be a waste of time for me to make.
I think it’s important to have a rough understanding
and intuition on how digital circuits and
computers work on a low level.
Another thing I wanted to mention, thanks
everybody for sending me suggestions for the
i.onik giveaway.
I have selected a winner who wrote me a nice
list of ideas and actually put some effort
in the mail.
And I just send the package out.
But thanks everybody!
Also I’m wondering and really curious about
how you discovered my channel.
Where do those 50 subscribers a day come from.
Who are you.
What are you doing?
Are you a student or a professional.
What do you you get out of this channel.
What are you hoping to find here.
How did you get here.
I would really love to hear your story, so
if you are bored and wanna tell me, write
me at liveoverflow@gmail.com
Near the end of March I will be at the TROOPERS
conference in Heidelberg, Germany.
I plan to bring a camera and hope to find
somebody who is interested in sharing some
knowledge, experience or a cool demo, so I
can make a video about it.
I don’t even care about if it’s some kind
of impactful 0day, and I don’t really care
about products.
I’m mostly interesting about weird bugs
or interesting research.
So if you have something neat to share, let
me know.
And maybe see you there.
Let’s wrap this up.
And see you soon.
