Hey, so in the past weeks I have been working 
on a really cool pentest project that I want
to tell you about. For this I even got 
a 12 core server with 128 GB of RAM.
I want to share each step along the way, so 
you can follow along and learn too. Though,
maybe some experienced viewers could 
already guess what this is about. Of
course this is going to be another Pentesting 
video, like every year! So let’s spin it!
Guys I’m in, we’re live, go on go for it!
Hello. We are sick of this 
LiveOverflow getting all the
views. So we decided to take it over. Our 
YouTube channels are much better anyway.
Uh oh, I think we’re losing it!
ZetaTwo has made some great Pwny Racing 
videos, where multiple hackers try to
exploit the same binary. So you can all watch 
and learn from their different approaches.
InsiderPhD makes lectures about web security 
that she has tricked people to watch as
“entertainment”. Get out your notebook, and a 
pen, and make sure you’re sitting near the front.
Codingo teaches you how to use various 
security tools and do bug bounties well,
so you may have reports worthy enough of 
a boom signoff. Has a giveaway addiction.
Hacksplained serves you easy to 
digest web app security slices of cake
directly to your table! #bugbountytips included
PinkDraconian makes walkthroughs of good 
challenges, the ones that are actually
useful in real life scenarios or that teach you 
the skills needed to go hunting in the wild!
Who would’ve guessed 
LiveOverflow’s security question to
“What is your maiden name” is “‘ OR 
1=1 -- -”, SQL injections are so 2017…
Rana Khalil mainly makes videos about 
web security related topics but will
occasionally cover topics related 
to infosec certs she’s pursuing.
Farah Hawa makes videos explaining 
some complex web hacking techniques
with a beginner friendly approach.
Superhero1 loves CTFs, hardware hacking and
the cool stuff that is hard to 
find or to learn on your own.
Pwnfunction creates videos on Binary Exploitation 
and Web Security but with better drawings than
Liveoverflow. Pwnfunction is also a level 1337 
Hacker, unlike liveoverflow who's level noob.
When I got into LiveOverflow's system, I 
had a look at his files. Why does he have
so many pictures of pens? He really is 
just obsessed with pentesting, isn’t he?
The XSS Rat goes in depth on all 
those “cheesy” bug bounty topics
AshF0x learns Binary Exploitation 
and Coding while on stream. Fun fact:
Every second one of his Hardware 
projects bursts into flames.
John Hammond showcases capture 
the flag videos, wargames,
security conferences, malware analysis and more.
BlindHacker Does career and resume workshops,
while still bringing hacking AMA’s 
to the table for education and fun.
Sometimes when pwning something, it can feel 
like they laid out a welcome mat for you,
but for LiveOverflow, it felt like he hang out a 
banner saying: Welcome, please pwn me. So easy!
Cybersecurity Meg says “I’m stoked” way too much 
while she creates videos about getting into the
Cybersecurity field, and provides guides 
on passing popular security certifications.
Reconless does reconnaissance. 
Just kidding it’s reconlESS!
247CTF combines beginner security topics 
with CTF's, crypto and game hacking.
Hey guys it’s DC Cybersec here 
and I want to help encourage YOU
to grow in cybersec. Much more 
than mr overflow has, anyway :P
Who would've known that I would be following 
a LiveOverflow tutorial to pwn LiveOverflow...
Lupin mostly streams on 
Twitch but in the near future,
some good content will be released 
on the Youtube channel. Stay tuned ;)
Stacksmashing creates in-depth 
videos on embedded-security,
reverse engineering & hardware hacking
CryptoCat produces CTF challenge walkthroughs 
aimed at beginners. Although they focus on
Binary Exploitation, Reverse Engineering and 
Offensive Security.. No topics are off limits :)
Tib3rius mostly creates videos about 
web application penetration testing,
and uploads edited versions of his Twitch streams
which usually cover TryHackMe rooms 
and Portswigger Web Academy content.
Hey, thanks for checking out this video. This 
video was actually edited by codingo. So huge
thanks to him. And of course a huge thanks to 
all the other security creators who participated
in this project. Thanks to them we have now a 
large list of YouTube channels you should put
on your blocklist in the description. Of 
course this was only an aprilfools video,
I would never recommend to you to watch these 
terrible channels with really bad hacking
videos - they are awful. Of course I want you 
to only watch quality, so just watch my videos.
