So as you know, each YouTube video has an
ID in the URL.
It identifies the video.
It’s unique for each video and it’s determined
randomly when you upload the video.
So… how is it possible, that I know, that
this video has the ID ?
I hope you are intrigued now!

Randomness is interesting, especially for
computers because there is not necessarily
anything random about them.
We tend to think about them as being deterministic
machines.
So in terms of security, for example in cryptography
it’s a huge challenge to get a good random
source.
If somebody could predict a random output,
then that often breaks cryptography.
Now the YouTube ID is not cryptographically
important but it’s a nice proof of concept.
So did I predict the ID?
Actually no, I abused something else.
So one day I noticed that the ID is actually
known during your upload.
You see it right there and you see it in your
videos overview.
So the files are not yet all uploaded, but
you already know the ID it is assigned.
And this allows us to perform a small switcheroo.
I have basically taken a youtube upload code
example that uses the google API to upload
a video.
And I modified the source code of that in
order to switch out the file whenever I want.
This means I can start out with the intro
of this video, let that upload very very very
slowly, and in the meantime I look up the
ID it got assigned, and quickly record and
edit this ID into a short clip.
I render that, and I specifically use the
mpg video container because it’s not a very
complicated file format and it allows you
to concatenate videos simply by concatenating
the raw bytes of the file.
You don’t need to run a special algorithm
that merges the video files.
This way I can just at some point tell the
modified script to switch out the file and
let it continue upload the new file that contains
the known ID.
Pretty neat, huh?
I thought that’s a pretty cool trick.
If you are interested in programming and it-security,
I can really recommend you to subscribe and
checkout some of my playlist.
For example I think the Pwn Adventure 3 series,
where we hack a game that was built to be
hacked, is really fun.
Bye bye.
