I feel like I made every video I ever 
wanted to make. In this bideo I want to
tell you why I feel like that, and also tell 
you about the over 300 videos I made so far.
Back in the days I used to do weekly videos, but 
I have stopped doing that for quite a while now.
There are two main reasons for that. First, 
YouTube is not my job, it doesn’t pay enough
and thus having another job and other life 
problems, YouTube just got too stressful to
keep up the schedule. But a second reason is 
also that over time I have less and less ideas
what to make videos about. You see, there is only 
so much content you can make before you explained
everything you know and videos get repetitive. 
And sometimes I feel like, “I made every video I
ever wanted to make. I shared all my knowledge and 
experience through my six years on youtube. If you
watch all my videos, you basically know everything 
I know”. Unfortunately YouTube is not a great
place for browsing that backlog. Most of you have 
not seen most of my videos even though I have over
300. And I don’t want to sound too arrogant, but 
I do believe that a large part of those videos are
the best educational hacking content you can find 
anywhere. I’m very proud of most of the videos I
have made, and they are exactly what I wish I 
had when I started studying computer science.
They are not sorted and structured for easy 
handholding learning, but I’m pretty confident
that my videos generally go a lot deeper, cover 
a much wider area and are more engaging through
a bit of storytelling and better editing, than 
most other resources out there. But as I said,
the problem is, YOU have to take a bit of your 
own responsibility to pick out the videos that
help you learn something, rather than me 
handholding you through linear education.
Also generally people watch what is recommended 
by the YT algorithm. And the more casual videos
tend to be the more successful ones. So maybe you 
MISSED all the nitty gritty technical detailed
videos. Or you subscribed years after I made them 
and you don’t even know what videos there are. As
I have just “celebrated” 6 years on YouTube with 
over 300 videos and over 600.000 subscribers,
I thought I would give you a bit of an overview 
of the topics you can actually find on my channel.
And also give you some advice on how I would 
approach my own channel, if I were you.

So first of all, let me guide your 
attention to the playlist tab on youtube.
Here you can find all videos that are part of some 
kind of series that might be of your interest.For
example my more popular and longer series on 
binary exploitation and memory corruptions.
While it is based on a bit of an older 
linux system from exploit.education,
the basics are still super relevant. And if you 
work through that, you are well equipped to forge
your own path going forward with this topic. 
There are a few more videos added to the list,
including one that I always wanted to make, and 
that is the weird return-oriented-programming
tutorial. That was one of my oldest 
video deams to reach, and I have done it.
Anyway. what people don’t get is that, even though 
you think binary exploitation is not your main
interest, if you are interested in understanding 
computers better, operating systems, or just want
to learn assembly and reverse engineering, this 
series can be a vehicle to learn all these topics.
Then we have the hardware security research 
playlist. It’s a smaller series but if you are
interested in hacking embedded devices, IoT, 
reverse engineering, the ARM architecture,
electronics or just want to 
learn more about assembly,
I don’t know a better resource than this.
The Pwn Adventure series is a game hacking series.
And what I think makes this series special is 
that I am not experienced in traditional game
hacking. The game hacking scene is insane and uses 
lots of crazy tools. But I was a novice and so I
just approached the game with my own ideas. So I 
think besides all the technical details I share,
it also shows you that you can transfer knowledge 
for example from the binary exploitation playlist,
directly to hacking this game. In later episodes 
we also then explore hacking the game on windows
so you can learn where linux and 
windows are similar or differ.
Related to this I even developed my own 
hackable game in Unity. It was part of
the cyber security challenge Germany, a 
CTF for students that I helped organize.
Not only is this short series a quick introduction 
into game dev, but it also talks about networking
and multiplayer server development, and of 
course also how unity games can be hacked.
Another step up from the binary exploitation 
videos is the Browser Exploitation playlist.
This series gives you a peak into modern 
state-of-the-art exploitation. But it
doesn’t mean you first have to watch the other 
series. You can just jump right in. Because
even just as a javascript developer with 
little to no lower-level coding experience,
I think it is fascinating to see how Javascript, 
in the case of webkit, works under the hood.
But if you are more interested in web security, 
then checkout the web hacking playlist.
It is less structured, it has some really basic 
introductory videos, but then it also includes a
few self-contained videos. For example there are 
several videos with really advanced XSS topics.
So if you understood the basics of XSS and CSRF, 
move on and look into those more crazy techniques
that I showed - for example the XSS in google.com. 
Or one of my favorite videos, a video about how to
identify bullshit XSS tips on twitter, and 
what really cool XSS research looks like.
Related to that is also the AngularJS Security 
Playlist. It is about older versions of angular.
But for anybody interested in JavaScript and 
modern javascript frameworks, I think this
is a super interesting topic to learn about.
Back in the web hacking playlist, I also added
the JavaScript popunder videos in there. They 
represent a typical video style for my channel,
where the topic is a cool and engaging story, but 
hidden inside, you get really technical tutorials,
in this case on javascript, browser bugs, 
analytical thinking and how to use the browser
developer tools. I think they represent the 
perfect tutorial style, because it doesn’t do the
boring old school teaching, it teaches technical 
details and tools, but with a fun engaging story.
Anyway, of course there are also other 
web topics, mostly from CTF challenges,
so you can also find videos on stuff 
such as server side request forgeries,
other client-side attacks like 
CSRF, or database injections.
And this leads us to general CTF videos. Sure, 
they are not well organized, and some of them
are very hard challenges, some are easier, but it 
doesn’t matter. I strongly believe, even if you
watch them and you think you do not understand 
every detail, you will learn about a very wide
variety of topics, tools, terminologies and so 
forth. And maybe in 2 years you read something
about hash length extension, you remember 
you heard a term before on a video from me,
and then you can watch it again to 
understand better what everything is about.
Another example for a video writeup I like a 
lot, is this firmware update challenge. Where
the solution involved university level math 
of linear algebra and finite fields. So not
only you learn about crypto attacks, but also 
about math, and all of that wrapped into a CTF
challenge. I really believe this is perfect 
content for computer science students and
could serve as a great motivation for students who 
struggle with “why the f’ do I need this math”.
Again I don’t want to sound too arrogant 
but inside these CTF writeup videos
I think there is a treasure 
trove of interesting topics.
For example I made 3 videos about an ethereum 
smart contract challenge. And I’m not sure if you
know this, but I have done ethereum smart contract 
audits professionally a few years ago. I stopped
because the crypto industry is dogshit, but I 
put everything I know about it into those videos.
And so if you are interested in ethereum and 
smart contracts, here you have a very deep
walkthrough including learning about ethereum 
VM internals. I don’t think there is a single
other youtube video on this deep level out there. 
Even blog articles about this topic are sparse.
Besides this CTF playlist, there is also another 
CTF playlist specifically from a hardware hacking
CTF. rhme2. And this series contains a lot of 
information about arduinos and generally embedded
devices. So if you are interested in electronics, 
IoT or generally hardware and lower level stuff,
this is a great series. Even though I’m no 
expert, this is stuff that goes beyond your
general computer science education. For 
example I’m explaining and showing fault
injections and AES side-channel attacks, 
which is not something you typically find
on youtube or elsewhere. At least not for 
free. This is super niche educational content.
And now I can also announce a series I’m 
starting soon. I will be covering the
sudoedit vulnerability in a series going 
from discovery, over analysing the bug to
even developing the exploitat. This is going 
to be very detailed, and I think this is very
unique educational content. So keep an eye out 
for that. Subscribe to make sure not to miss it.
I also made a few videos about 
mobile security, where we for
example looked at the communication 
between the SIM card and the phone.
It’s probably not knowledge you can apply in 
typical IT security work, but I think it’s
important to get a sense for how the IT world 
works. How our devices work. And that general
broad understanding will lead you to do better 
work in other areas. I strongly believe that.
I also have a few more casual 
videos, for example in the
“my life in shirt stories” I use old t-shirts 
to talk aout my career and life. So if you
are interested in career advice or how 
a career can look like, check that out.
Unfortunately not all my videos fit well into 
playlists. So there are still tons of videos that
I think are very educational but 
they are not easily discoverable.
For example a video about what are file 
formats, why we like to use hex numbers in IT,
or reverse engineering the old 
Pokemon Games. Yes it’s pokemon,
and yes it’s games. But the techniques and 
analytical approaches are the same as if it were
other “more important” hacking. Therefore they 
are another example of my teaching style, where
we have a playful story, but hiding inside of it, 
is very low-level technical educational content.
So you see, I covered a lot. Hardware, Software, 
Cryptography, low-level system and firmware
hacking, highlevel code like python or 
javascript, reverse engineering, exploitation,
software development, … and more.
However, as I said, YOU are a bit more
responsible in creating your own path. These 
videos do not fit well into a straight line.
In my video the secret step-by-step guide to learn 
hacking I explain, that it’s normal and good to
jump around between topics. And you have to do 
this with my videos too. I know that there are
many videos you wont understand right away and 
you think you shouldn’t watch them. But that is
NOT a problem. They are NOT a waste of your time. 
I’m convinced you do take SOMETHING away from it.
Even if it’s just knowing that this topic or 
terminology exists. You will start to develop
an intuition for this stuff and when you see 
related topics you will connect them. Over time
your blurry picture of everything clears up and 
then you can also revisit those videos later. It’s
super important to know what you don’t know. So be 
happy if you do not understand a video, because it
means you get a chance to learn more and you have 
a goal that you can work towards. And of course
you can always pause a video and google a term 
I used, or try something out yourself. Or just
keep watching other videos and come back in a few 
months to that video. I’m sure the second time you
will understand more! My videos are generally not 
hand holding, but they are guidance and you can
use them as a reference point, or starting point, 
to venture off and explore a topic on your own.
Anyway. Maybe now you can understand why 
sometimes I feel like I covered everything.
And if you would explore my videos I feel like 
you would really really learn a lot. I know
I’m not an expert in any of these fields, 
I don’t claim that I know everything. And
I understand that some people might not like 
my voice, prefer another presentation style,
want a book or a linear path, and that is 
totally fine. But I’m very proud of my videos.
And I’m not humble about my videos. I believe 
they are, as of today, one of the best
educational hacking content that exists. Not just 
youtube. Educational security content in general.
And that makes me proud. It makes me proud that I 
can look at my own work and think, I spent 6 years
on this, and the result is exactly what I ever 
wanted when I was a computer science student.
Before I end this video, I’d like to redirect 
you also to my website liveoverflow.com.
I recently changed the design to maybe 
improve the discoverability of my videos.
I have this big goal to convert all 
my videos into written articles.
I know not everybody likes videos, but I 
also generally think in a perfect world,
there would be a text article, along every 
video. So on here you can very easily search
for topics you are interested in and find a 
related video. For example let’s say you are
interested in the reverse engineering tool Ghidra, 
simply search for it, and you get a selection of
videos where ghidra is used. I think that’s the 
perfect tutorial to learn about ghidra, because
the “boring tool usage” is wrapped 
into a hopefully interesting story.
Unfortunately not all my videos have articles yet. 
And I don’t have the time to work through my whole
backlog and create these writeups. A while ago I 
used to pay PwnFunction, another YouTuber, to help
me with that. But he is also busy working on his 
own channel, making much better drawing visuals
than me. So there was no progress in a long time. 
But recently I started working with somebody I met
through insiderphd. I’m basically re-investing 
the patreon and youtube membership money, into
paying somebody to go through my videos and create 
articles. I think this is the perfect use of the
money, so if you want to support my future videos 
and contribute to the creation of these articles,
checkout how you can support the project 
LiveOverflow on liveoverflow.com/support
Anyway. Hopefully this overview over my 
channel helps you to discover all the
topics you are interested in.
And I hope you are the 16,
20 or 24 year old version of me, 
who was eager to learn more and
couldn’t find deeply technical explanations 
anywhere. But you found these videos here,
and they open up the world of IT security and 
hacking to you. That would mean the world to me.
