Hey!
This is just a quick announcement video to
tell you about Gynvael’s Winter GameDev
Challenge 2018/19.
Gynvael is also CTF player who is doing videos
and livestreams on YouTube about security
and hacking, however he also likes to challenge
creativity through various GameDev challenges
he has organized in the past.
Checkout the cool footage of games from previous
rounds.
I really liked this, so for this round I joined
him.
Together we ramped up the prices and I will
help him judge entries.
The great thing about a GameDev challenge
like this is, that you can win prizes, you
are given a deadline and some other constraints.
So you have a competitiveness that can motivate
you, and constraints that allow you to be
creative.
In this particular challenge you are given
the following premise of the story.
You have to create a game where the player
is a space marine technician, or hacker, who
helps a squad of space marines while they
are exploring an abandoned space station.
And the idea is that you are supposed to create
an “unrealistic” hacking simulation.
Think of movie hacking scenes.
I mean you can be realistic, or totally crazy,
in the end all that matters is that it looks
like crazy hacking and is FUN TO PLAY.
You also have some other constraints, for
example the game must run in 1080p and you
must use this overlay for your game.
Essentially this simulates two screens of
a computer.
We are currently working on a nicer overlay
graphics that makes it look like a cool hacking
screen terminal computer, so check back a
bit later to see the final graphic.
But we hope having only these two screens
available for the actual game, it leads to
some interesting gameplay mechanics.
So think of something cool.
You also must make this game with client-side
web technology.
Meaning javascript, css and HTML.
You can also do web assembly, or straight
javascript, whatever.
And if you have never done that, it’s a
perfect opportunity to start learning some
javascript.
Protip, look at previous submissions and get
inspired by their code.
But don’t worry so much about the code.
Remember we are not judging your code quality,
all that counts is the game itself.
Anyway, please checkout the exact rules, constraints
and frequently asked questions and how it
all works on gynvael’s blog I linked below,
and I really hope you participate.
We are looking forward to your submissions!
