Okay sorry sorry, I know you wanna see more
technical stuff, but I think it’s important
to hear a bit more about why you would even
use a cryptocurrency hardware wallet and what
you protect against.
What’s your threat model.
These devices promise that they are more secure
than an alternative but threats are multifaceted
and I want to explore this a bit more.
When you unpack the Ledger you will find a
paper called Recovery Sheet.
That is actually intended to backup your private
key, by writing down the mnemonic phrase that
can be used to derive your actual private
key from.
Basically, by indirection, it is your private
key.
Now why would Ledger, this supposedly awesome
secure wallet tell you to write down your
secret key on a paper?
If the paper is more secure then why would
you buy a ledger?
This comes down to the threat model and the
huge amount of different situations you have
to consider.
The paper wallet and the hardware wallet cover
different aspects and are thus in some way
difficult to compare.
I mean we can compare them but we can’t
rank them.
Which one is better, totally depends on a
given situation.
The advantage of a paper wallet is, that everybody
understands the strength and weaknesses of
paper.
Even amish understand the limitations of a
secret written on a piece of paper.
And this is a huuge advantage.
You understand that you shouldn’t carry
it around in your pocket because you could
loose it.
Which means you definitely shouldn’t travel
with it.
It’s also obviously not a digital device
so it can’t get malware.
You also understand that if somebody breaks
into your house they could steal it.
And so you also know that a small mini-safe
might prevent simple thieves, but also that
a huge secure built in safe is better to protect
it.
But also that your kid could shouldersurf
you when you enter your code to the safe.
You also understand that paper can burn in
a fire or be destroyed by water damage.
But also that everytime you want to access
your cryptocurrencies, you need to enter that
private key into some device to perform the
cryptographic computations, and those could
have malware.
You get the point, you understand, probably
every kid understands, the limitations and
advantages of paper.
Because of that Ledger encourages you to write
it down.
Paper is probably the easiest to understand
method to store a private key, because everybody
understands what it takes to keep that safe.
That’s why it’s a great way to backup
your key.
But it’s also obvious that that might not
be true for everybody.
For example if you travel a lot, then where
could you keep that paper safe.
It has limitations.
And I hope that makes sense.
Now what about these hardware wallets.
Ledger, Trezor, KeepKey, Bitfi?
In a very simple sense they are devices that
somehow store your secret key, but also perform
the cryptographic algorithms, so the key never
leaves the device and for example malware
on your computer can’t steal your coins.
So this is probably the biggest threat model
that hardware wallets want to cover.
Protect YOU from malware you might get on
your internet connected laptop, because you
download cracked games bundled with a trojan
after you put all your money into bitcoins
instead.
But this is simpler said than done.
There are a lot of different ways how this
can be achieved, so let’s quickly look at
a few hardware wallets and what they consider
their main features.
Ledger supports different apps to support
different crypto currencies.
Those apps run on the secure element of the
Ledger.
It has a built in display to verify transactions
It has buttons to confirm transactions
Access to the ledger is protected by a PIN,
which apparently erases your data if it was
entered wrong three times.
It also supports FIDO, which is something
entirely different but super nice, I also
use U2F for many of my accounts.
And then the most funny feature is the Backup
& Restore feature, that your accounts are
backed up on a recovery sheet.
So this paper is one of the notable six features
coming with the Ledger.
Pretty funny.
Trezor has more transparency due to open source
it also features a display and buttons to
verify transactions and you also get a paper
to write down your recovery key.
It also has PIN and passphrase entry to prevent
simple access to your wallet.
Keep Key also offers you to backup your recovery
sentence on a paper.
Also is protected by a pin entry.
And the display also allows you to verify
transactions before sending them.
And apparently it’s virus and malware proof.
And there are probably more but the point
is not to show you all the available commercial
products.
I just wanted to show you that the idea is
generally the same.
So let’s talk quickly about why they are
sharing those same traits.
Those were:
Backup and recovery by using a paper wallet
Secure storage of your private key
A display to show some critical information
Some kind of buttons or input
And a Pin or passphrase
First of all, digital devices can be destroyed,
they can break or can be lost.
Especially because these hardware wallets
are intended to be carried around with you.
So it’s important that you have backups.
And maybe a backup of your backup.
Or some multisig setup where you give different
trusted entities different pieces.
So that’s a general threat everybody knows.
Then we have the secure storage.
Now the Ledger for example uses a secure element
which is a special chip which is intended
to be a secure chip.
There are a lot of hardware countermeasures
implemented in there and there is a bit of
secrecy around it what they actually do, but
that’s just how it is.
As you know from the previous video, the Ledger
has a Secure Chip and an insecure chip.
The Trezor and the KeepKey just have a simple
non-secure chip.
But that doesn’t mean that much.
The problem with the Ledger was not that it’s
not a secure chip, but that they don’t care
that you could run malicious code on it.
Anyway.
Then we have a display and buttons.
And that becomes super important when we talk
about the probably most important case.
Malware on your computer.
There are two possibilities for a regular
software wallet.
First is you just have the private key somewhere
on disk.
Or the second option is that the key is encrypted
and requires a passphrase or pin to decrypt
first.
In either case the key is at some point accessible
for malware on your computer to steal it.
These hardware wallets are intended to be
used together with a software on your computer
and so even if a malware would spoof the address
shown to you on your computer, or try to create
transactions without your knowledge, the device
will show this request to you and you can
accept or decline.
And all hardware devices kind of fulfil that
same purpose.
Offload the private key and crypto calculations
to a second device so that your coins are
safe even if your regular internet connected
computer is compromised.
Now if you trust your machine to never catch
malware, or never catch malware that targets
your coins, then making sure your private
key is encrypted when it’s not used, is
probably enough.
If your device is stolen or you forget to
lock your laptop, your coins are safe.
But if you want an additional layer, because
you can’t trust your machine, you can offload
that stuff on a second device.
And you could totally use a raspberry pi or
an old laptop that will never be connected
to the internet, or firewalled and only allow
to connect to the crypto networks.
Then do the crypto calculations on there.
And have full disk encryption with a passphrase
to prevent access in case it’s stolen.
It’s a simple clumsy hardware wallet solving
the same threat.
But as you may slowly understand is, then
why would you not just use a raspberry pi,
or why would you want a ledger or a trezor
instead of a keepkey.
Well, there are nuances to everything.
A HUUGE factor is, that it has nothing to
do with security.
And that’s convenience.
These hardware wallets are just super convenient.
I personally don’t mind to spend money on
something that is less hassle.
And maybe some wallets support some obscure
scam coins that you really want.
So from this highlever perspective you could
use any hardware wallet.
They all implement pretty much the same thing
and aim to protect against the same threats.
So why not just get the one you feel the coolest
with.
Except the BITFI wallet.
DO NOT BUY the bitfi wallet.
So the other day a new hardware wallet appeared
on the scene, the bitfi wallet.
Heavily endorsed by charlatan, fraudster and
scammer John McAfee.
That alone should already ring your alarm
bells… buuuut…
I got baited into buying two for doing some
research, because of the ridiculous claim
that it’s unhackable and they offer 100.000$...
shortly after I placed my order I found the
bug bounty rules what exactly they require
for a reward.
They say they put some coins on it, and if
you successful extract the coins and empty
the wallet, this would be considered a successful
hack.
So basically they only consider loosing or
stealing of the wallet a valid threat.
But that’s complete bullshit.
That’s just one possible situation.
The bitfi wallet prides itself with Open Source,
which is just a charade because only the key
derivation algorithm is open source.
As you can see here, you plug in your passphrase,
along some other stuff and the private key
falls out at the end.
So even if you completely get access to all
the data on the wallet, you have no chance.
You need to bruteforce that.
And so even putting your regular encrypted
wallet on your parents malware infected machine
is equally safe.
Because to decrypt it you need the passphrase.
That threat model is soo stupid.
Especially because that device is just a shitty
repurposed android phone, with wifi, so that
doesn’t scream confidence at all.
They say it’s unhackable because they at
least understand basic math and crypto and
know that the data is worthless without the
passphrase so they structured this bullshit
bounty around it.
And the fact that maybe you can get malware
on it and steal it as soon as the user unlocks
the private key - doesn’t count.
Urgh… makes me so angry.
I really hope somebody finds a flaw int the
key derivation which lowers the brute force
search space drastically.
Anyway…
So we talked about the general more highlevel
goals.
But as I just hinted at with the bitfi wallet,
there are small nuances to everything.
For example in some way the Ledger with the
secure element might offer much stronger protection
than just a regular chip storing the key like
in the Trezor, though hopefully both devices
have the key encrypted and derive a decryption
key from the user input.
But then also the Ledger allows running apps
on the secure element, which is sandboxed
and offers only restricted syscalls, but there
were issues with that before, so I’m not
sure if that was a good architecture choice.
Then you have the super easy ability to run
untrusted code on the Ledgers unsecure processor,
a malware can spread to the Ledger.
But as we know from last video, that might
not even be problematic.
While the Trezor also has an unsecure chip
but at least tries to make getting malicious
code on there harder.
Another aspect is, and I’m not paranoid,
I totally trust Ledger as much as I trust
Windows and Google and Apple to not push malicious
updates, but theoretically those wallet developers
could push a backdoored software update to
steal your key.
And then there might be even smaller nuances.
How fast does the hardware wallet lock itself
if you walk away from your machine.
How long can passphrases or pins be and how
easy is it to enter them.
Are keys extractable from memory if somebody
does a cold boot or somehow accesses the memory
while device has still power vs. when it was
powered off.
And mauch much more.
And the problem here is, that I don’t even
f’n know what to do now.
All these hardware devices are extremely complex.
Just because I spent now several days with
the ledger I have a better understanding of
the architecture and can criticise and praise
it in certain aspects, and I can’t do that
for any other wallet.
And I’m even pretty experienced with IT
security compared to the average person.
How do you expect people to use these devices
well.
And this is where we come back to the paper
wallet.
The paper is so easy to understand and it’s
easy to be confident when handling it.
And so even if I have some criticism about
the ledger, because I understand better the
possible weaknesses, right now, I would probably
prefer a Ledger over another wallet, just
because the research into it empowers me as
a potential user to use it’s potential and
pay attention to the situation where I don’t
trust it.
I mean I don’t really have use for a hardware
wallet anyway.
But that’s an interesting perspective for
me.
And to become a bit political, that’s why
it’s so important that we have to fight
for more laws protecting researchers and allowing
reverse engineering, because these things
are so complex without being allowed to look
under the hood and check if the marketing
claims are correct, we are lost.
So I hope this unstructured rant helped you
a bit more in understanding the complex threat
models and how to analyse if a security product
really does what it hope it does.
Next video we will start with opening up the
Ledger Nano S.
