Is leaking your IP address really dangerous? It 
seems like many people think so, because because
when I released my minecraft hacking video 
series, I kept leaking my personal IP,
as well as the IP of other players (oops sorry?). 
After that I got tons of worrying messages telling
me about it, I should immediately remove it. 
But how bad is it really? I believe it is not
bad at all. And my suspicion is that the 
crazy amount of VPN ads manipulate people
into believing it is dangerous or bad. So In 
this video I want to investigate this “danger”
of leaking your IP address. And at the end I 
also will tell you my recommendation on what
you could do instead of a VPN. As always, these 
are just my opinions on the matter. The devil
is in the details. So feel free to challenge my 
views and discuss with others in the comments.
This video is sponsored by Noo… 
oobody. Of course I won't advertise
a VPN in this video.
Sorry I had to do it.
Anyway… where do we start.
In theory, IP addresses are
unique and identify a computer on the 
internet. For example a minecraft server
address. This part is the IP, it identifies 
the computer, so where to find the server
on the internet. And this is the port. 
The port is then used ON that computer,
to find which program you want to communicate 
with. In the case of a minecraft server,
it’s the minecraft server program. On the same 
computer you could also host a website, and then
the webserver program would be accessible on maybe 
port 80. But we want to focus on the IP address.
As you can see, IPs are supposed to be addresses 
for devices on the internet. And so they
are inherently public. For example, I didn’t 
release the IP address of my minecraft server,
and still people found it. Because it’s “easy” 
to scan all IPv4 addresses on the internet.
And that’s our first lesson! How much 
can you even “hide” your IP. If there
is anything insecure about your device, if you 
really believe if a hacker can hack you when
they know your IP, you are screwed anyway. 
people will find your device regardless.
But don’t worry not only are modern devices 
generally secure. You have another layer of
protection you might not know about. Yes my 
minecraft server is directly accessible via
an IP address. But as you probably have heard, we 
don’t have enough IP addresses for all devices on
the internet. How did we try to solve that 
problem? You can see it here. I have two
phones connected to the same wifi and I look up 
their IP address. Both phones have the same IP.
This is very common for residential internet 
connections. So the IP does not actually
identify every device, it’s just the address of 
the device directly connected to the internet.
Usually at home this is your Router. Which means 
this single IP does not point to your device. It
points to the router, but also, behind this 
address there could be dozens of devices.
And in a larger shared flat, a college dorm, 
hotel or an office, maybe several hundreds of
devices and different people use the same 
IP. This is achieved through NAT. It’s an
interesting technique and quite clever how 
routers translate packets and forward them
to the correct local device. There are also 
some very interesting “weaknesses” in NAT
which get exploited for good reasons, like 
UDP hole punching for playing games, or for
bad malicious reasons like NAT Slipstreaming.
But that’s not the topic of the video. The
important part is that the IP address is shared 
by many devices and often shared by many different
people, which has legal implications. If you 
have roommates and you commit a cyber crime,
they don’t know who exactly committed the crime. 
Was it you or your roomate? Depending on your
local laws, maybe this means they cannot 
prove who committed it and you are safe
(or maybe they raid both of you), or they 
default to charging the owner of the wifi.
But besides legal trouble, point being. 
Your public IP address, the address website
owners and minecraft server owners see, 
might be used by many different people.
So this is the second lesson. The same 
IP does not mean, it’s the same person.
Of course, if you live alone things might be 
different, you don’t have this legal “protection”.
However some ISPs have started to deploy DS-Lite. 
It’s very common in Germany. This is when IPv4 is
tunneled over IPv6 leading to another layer 
of NAT or carrier-grade nat, which means.
Behind this public IP there might be HUNDREDS of 
customers, each of them with dozens of devices.
And don’t forget lots of people use 
the internet through LTE. Here your
mobile operator also probably shares IP 
addresses for many connected devices.
So even living alone, your public IP 
might be shared by many many people.
On top of that, it’s very common 
when you restart your router,
or it happens automatically every 24h, the IP 
address you get assigned by your ISP changes.
So from the point of view of a 
website operating seeing your IP,
they don’t know if it’s really you, and the 
next day you might have a different IP anyway.
But of course all of these things depend 
on the ISP, and probably every country
has different behavior as well, so the best 
thing for you is just to test it yourself.
I have read in the comments that there are 
a few people that actually have a static IP,
though usually that requires special contracts 
or a business contract and I would guess those
people know what they are doing and know 
why they want a static IP. By that I mean,
they want a static IP so people can know the 
static IP. And then if you worry about people
knowing your static IP, don’t get a static IP.
Of course there are also people who had no
choice for a static IP, but then again. What 
exactly are you worrying about? We will get
to those threats in a moment. But, for most 
people the IP address changes regularly and
it just identifies the home router, or a router 
of your ISP or mobile operator. So leaking an
IP address doesn't really mean much. There could 
be literally hundreds of people behind that IP.
This actually creates lots of problems when 
blocking “malicious IP” addresses. Because if
you as a website owner block an IP, you 
might accidentally block a whole area,
like a hotel or office, so blocking 
hundreds of people from using your service.
Anyway. Now we covered some important 
properties of IP addresses. Let’s
talk about the impact of “leaking IP 
addresses”. What’s the threat model.
I see two areas. “Hacking” or “attacking” 
IPs and more the privacy concern.
As you can already tell, if you leak the IP 
address of a person, the IP address could mean
different things. It could just point to a router 
of the ISP, or it could point to your home router.
Attacking the home router might be the most 
risky case, because you might have an outdated
router with some exposed service or default 
credentials that could be hacked. Or it can be
directly targeted for a denial of service attack.
So maybe you feel worried about your unsecure
router and think that’s a good reason why you need 
to keep your IP private. But keep in mind, all IP
addresses are public. There are not that many. You 
can literally scan the whole internet in like half
an hour. And malicious hackers constantly scan the 
internet for vulnerable routers to take them over.
So if there is a known exploit in your router, 
your router might already be hacked. And if not,
then maybe your ISP knows about the issue 
and blocks these attempts on their end.
So security issues are not really a 
concern. And if it is, you need to fix
the root issue. Security through obscurity, 
aka. Trying to hide your IP, doesn’t fix it.
However, maybe you don’t worry about security 
issues, but about denial of service attacks.
It’s easy to overwhelm a basic home router. 
but as I said, in lots of cases the IP doesn’t
even point at your home router. At this 
point an attacker DDoSes the ISP directly.
And keep in mind. It’s just a DOS. it might 
knock you off the internet temporarily, and for
some businesses or streamers this has economical 
consequences. But that’s all there is. Go outside,
touch some grass, and when you come back maybe it 
stopped and you can continue. You have no actual
loss of privacy there. It’s not hacking. And 
maybe browser restart gives you a new IP anyway.
But are there any other privacy concerns?
VPN companies always advertise protecting
your privacy by hiding your IP. But as we 
already learned, in lots of cases the home
IP is already achieving the same, it’s also 
a public IP shared by many other customers.
So from the point of view of the internet user, 
who sees that IP, you are already obscured. But
of course there are some differences between 
a VPN and an ISP. So let’s go through them.
The probably most important difference 
is the legal jurisdiction. Depending on
a country's laws, ISPs might be required 
to keep logs on which customer was using
what IP. So when law enforcement wants 
to find your real identity from an IP,
they can ask the ISP for it. This is definitely a 
“risk”, if you intend to break those local laws.
But actually, this is the same for 
VPN companies as well, they might be
required by their local laws to do the same.
So it really depends on what jurisdiction you
live in, and what level of crime you commited. Of 
course a VPN is a second layer that might shield
you from basic legal investigations 
because they operate in a different
country than where you live and your ISP is 
located, BUT laws exist to protect both ways.
Not only do laws allow police to request 
information about an IP, there are also
data protection laws that protect how that data is 
used and when it has to be deleted and so forth.
So if you use a VPN registered in some weird 
ass country where your national police has
a hard time to get data from, yes you are 
probably safe from legal investigations, but,
maybe the privacy laws of the VPN’s country are so 
“bad” that they can happily log all the websites,
inject ads, create profiles on you and sell 
all this data to advertisement companies.
It’s hard to say what in practice really 
happens, but in the end you have to trust
them. So I personally prefer to route my 
traffic through my local ISP where I also have
legal “power” and “rights” that I could defend, 
versus routing my traffic through a shady shell
company who tells me with ads I should trust them.
But I don’t want to fear monger too much because
ultimately most connections are encrypted 
thanks to SSL anyway. So the privacy risk
is definitely not very high. For the legal 
risks, there it depends a lot on what you do.
But as you can see, in the end it 
all comes down to trust. Where do
you want your packets to travel 
through. Do you trust your ISP
more or the VPN provider more. You 
have to make that decision yourself.
Also I think it’s important to not forget what 
it means to have a “privacy” issue. I mean,
privacy issues arise when you share private 
information. So what private information
does your IP leak? If you use facebook 
and instagram to share private photos,
it doesn’t matter if you used a VPN or your 
regular IP. you still shared your private
photos online. So the actions you do online 
are much more important than the IP. THe
only thing IPs leak is your “location”. 
But this is a bit misleading. Because,
what do you mean by “location”? It doesn’t leak 
your exact GPS coordinates. It might point to the
city you live in. But most likely it points to 
a region where tens of thousands or hundreds of
thousands of people live. Of course some might 
want to completely hide their general location
and don’t want anybody to know they live in 
Berlin. But I don’t think this is generally
an issue most people have to care about. Think 
about “Normal people”, they post a single picture
on instagram from hiking in their home, and 
people could figure out their general location.
So let’s talk about me leaking the IP address of 
players on my Minecraft servers. How bad was that?
In my opinion, some of those IP addresses are 
dynamic and changed long before I uploaded the
video, and some of the IP addresses are 
shared with hundreds of people anyway.
Of course it might leak the rough 
geographic location of some players,
but maybe they don’t care or they leaked it in 
many other ways. For example OMG HERE I LEAK
THE FAMOUS OTTOMATED_ IP ADDRESS! Because I’m 
so famous he even came onto my server. Now we
can IP geolocate him to seattle. OH MY GOD. But 
on his github he also says he lives in seattle.
So here is my last argument why me leaking 
IP addresses of the server is not bad. IF
ONE OF THOSE PLAYERS REALLY REALLY CARED 
ABOUT HIDING THEIR TRACKS ONLINE BEING
SUPER PARANOID, THEY MUST HAVE USED 
A VPN TO ACCESS THE SERVER ANYWAY.
As you can see, In my opinion. There is 
no meaningful security risk or meaningful
privacy issue about leaking IPs. There 
are crazy edge-cases with very weird
threat models where this all can matter, I 
agree they exist, but they will have to deal
with those threats on their end. because their 
threat-model probably doesn’t include “trust
nobody except this dude LiveOverflow, 
so I directly connect to his server”.
If you your threat model is “cannot 
trust anything I connect to online”,
then “don’t connect to it” or “don’t use your 
“home IP”, whatever you consider your home IP”.
Okay. anyway… Now many of you watching 
probably also scream the whole time “IS
HE TAALKING ABOUT IPv4 OR IPv6”? And 
well… yeah… Most of what I mentioned
mostly applies to IPv4. Due to them running 
out and many customers will share IP addresses.
Leading to the ISP setups discussed in this 
video. With IPV6 the game kinda changes.
To be honest I’m not super sure how the ISP setups 
look like with IPv6. The little bit of networking
knowledge I have is mostly limited to IPv4. 
But I guess depending on your internet setup,
your devices might actually be directly accessible 
from the internet if the IP is known. So suddenly
leaking the IPV6 of a device COULD mean 
that an outside attacker has direct access
to the device. And not like with Ipv4 where an 
outside attacker only “sees” your router or your
ISPs router. So I think that could be an issue.
And to be honest, I personally rely a lot on IPv4,
DS-Lite, NAT and routers in general being my 
“firewall”. No clue how fucked up IPv6 maybe is.
But this whole video was motivated 
due to the comments on me leaking
IPv4 addresses. Soooo… Well…
Anyway. In the beginning I also
promised to share what I use if I 
have to be anonymous online. And
that is TOR. When I have the use-case 
to really hide my internet connection,
I will use TOR. TOR is probably the strongest and 
most reliable tool you have for internet privacy.
But of course you have to use it right, you 
always have to think about your threat model.
Because while you are very anonymous, the TOR 
exit nodes can be operated by anybody and they
WILL log traffic and collect data. Maybe even 
manipulate traffic. But that’s the same power
your ISP or VPN provider has. So it is generally 
a threat model you should operate within,
if you care about that kind of stuff. Luckily you 
have SSL to encrypt actual data transmitted and so
in practice it’s not super risky.
Anyway…
Those were some thoughts I have on the danger of 
leaking IP addresses. And Why you shouldn’t fall
victim to the fear mongering of VPN providers. 
Of course there can be legitimate concerns about
leaking IP addresses, which some of them 
I mentioned, like streamers and ddossing,
but hopefully you see that in the most general 
case it just doesn’t matter. But if you are
one of those edge-cases, try to really define 
your threat model. Don’t just blatantly use a
VPN because it makes you feel safer. What exactly 
are you protecting against. And then think about
what are the most effective measures against it. 
Which of course is only possible if you actually
try to learn more about networking. But maybe 
that’s a good motivation to learn some IT stuff.
Also check the comments, I’m sure there are 
people who share their opinion and mention
technical nuances I maybe forgot or didn’t explain 
correctly. So that’s probably interesting as well.
While I was editing this video, malware 
researcher oalabs released a related video
titled “Your VPN Sucks for Malware Analysis”. 
I really recommend you check it out, because
it provides a very unique perspective about 
the topic you probably haven’t heard before.
