A very common type of question I get is, how
to get a job as a penetration tester.
How to work in bug bounty.
Are certificates necessary for a job.
What should I study in university, and so
forth...
On this channel I typically don’t talk about
career, job or interview advice.
To be honest I find a lot of these type of
videos kinda dumb.
Most of the time people simply share their
experience, and believe their way is the best
way, or how it’s supposed to be done.
And I’m very well aware that my job is pretty
unique and I’m pretty young so I don’t
have a lot of job experience.
And on top of that, the field of IT, and especially
security is constantly changing.
For example, if you want to know which programming
languages to learn, or what kind of vulnerability
classes to look into, I would have said different
things not even 5 years ago.
But most importantly, everybody is different.
Everybody is at a different stage in life.
Everybody has a different background.
There are huge differences between countries
and even cities where you live.
There is just no good advice for everybody.
But I also understand that people want a bit
of guidance and ideas on what to do next in
their career.
And so for example, I do advocate a lot for
CTFs.
More specifically the community driven CTFs
you can find on pages like CTFtime.org or
other wargames.
That stuff worked for me, but I understand
this will not be for everybody.
And so I don't feel comfortable to tell you
“do this, this and this”, and then you
get a job.
But I do have a few thoughts about this topic
I want to share.
So let’s discuss it in this video
If you wonder why I wear so many t-shirts
at the same time, This was my december 2020
project.
I have done a “creative video series”,
where I go over t-shirts I have collected
over the years from, for example, IT security
conferences.
And I used them to tell you about my life:
how I went from a nerd doing penspinning,
to somebody working professionally as a penetration
tester, and also YouTuber.
This series should never be a blueprint for
your life, infact it’s impossible to follow
exactly my steps, because the reality is,
that any person’s career, is full of unforeseen
opportunities or problems.
It’s too unique.
But for anybody younger, it’s a bit hard
to imagine how a career could look like, because
of course they never had one.
At least that was my experience.
When I was in school I imagined life to go
the way:
Kindergarten -> school -> highschool -> university
-> job.
And for a lot of professions that is also
true.
If you take for example the field of medicine.
Then medicine is a very old profession and
society, with it’s history, laws, regulations,
customs have implemented systems that are
pretty strict.
This means you can literally look up a diagram
for almost any country on how to become a
doctor.
For example here is a wikipedia entry for
the medical education in australia.
And if you are interested in becoming a doctor
in australia, you don’t really have another
choice than get into this system and follow
the steps.
And because most other professions evolved
for centuries, they kinda all have pretty
clear paths.
Now diagrams like this also exist for IT security.
For example this one . But the difference
is that these are not institutionalized paths,
some random person just made that up.
Often for marketing reasons.
Maybe selling their courses or certificates
or whatever.
But people want guidance, so there is demand.
But the big difference from IT to other professions
is that this industry is extremely young.
There are so many people alive who work in
IT, who went to school and university, before
even computer science existed widely as a
degree.
And now think about hacking and IT security.
When I had to choose what to study after school
in 2010, there was maybe one university which
kinda had an IT security degree, but maybe
it was also only a masters degree.
So I couldn’t even study it if I wanted
to.
So in the larger IT industry it’s very common
that people get hired that have not studied
computer science.
Because people just don’t have those degrees.
Well for computer science I think this is
changing.
Computer science degrees have been VERY popular
the past two deceased or so.
Which means, the people who studied computer
science then, are now in positions where they
decide who to hire.
And slowly the hiring requirements shift into
a more traditional institutionalized path.
For a developer it slowly is more and more
a hard requirement.
But compared to medicine it’s still faaaaar
from being as strict.
But cyber security is lagging behind even
more.
Only this decade degrees about security start
to become available.
But we are still so early, that requirements
for such degrees just do not make sense.
And they won’t exist for the next decade.
Only when you think maybe 10-30 years ahead,
then it might also have changed.
But then you, who is watching this now, hopefully
already has many years of job experience,
and then a degree is often also unnecessary.
So because in the world if IT or cyber security,
no clear path exists, you are also much more
free.
And so it also created a market for private
education through paid courses and certificates,
which somewhat have become an industry standard
and might be perceived as a strong necessary
requirement.
But also I don’t really think that’s really
true.
I think the pressure to do certificates is
mostly good marketing, and it’s more about
instilling a fear that you need it, rather
than it being actually needed.
Unfortunately all of this means I can’t
offer you a solution to this.
I cannot tell you “do this and that” and
you get a job.
And I think everybody else who gives advice
like that, either at best wants to be nice
and helpful, or worst, wants to sell you a
product.
Anyway.
I do think it’s good to somehow make a rough
plan.
Be it going to university, or going the certificate
route.
Any plan you can keep working towards is helpful.
For example my plan was going through the
traditional steps of school, highscool and
then university.
But I was always ready to change my plan,
if new opportunities came up.
Anyway, there is actually one career advice,
that I do think is really helpful.
And that is, try to look into the career of
others, not to copy it, which is impossible,
but just to realize that real life is messy
and life always changes, and you cannot make
a clear path.
In 2017 I remember stumbling over bogotter’s
video project, at the time he was a Guild
Wars 2 youtuber, called “My journey to full-time
streamer”.
And it’s pretty long but I think it’s
so fascinating.
This is a normal person, with a normal career,
and it really gives you a detailed insight
into one example.
I know this doesn’t have anything to do
with IT security, but watching this helped
me to better understand the world of jobs
and careers.
There was also a trend some years ago, about
Youtuber’s draw my life.
Unfortunately most of these videos are very
short and don’t go into much detail.
But I still love them because, in this case
they are all youtubers, but all of them have
different paths that let them there.
So you can relate this to IT security, because
like being a YouTuber, IT security is also
such a young job that clear career paths just
don’t exist.
And that’s where I think my t-shirt series
is another example for you.
I have unlisted the t-shirt videos because
they kinda spam my channel, many people are
hating on it (btw you are all idiots), but
you can find the playlist on the channel or
in the video description.
And I think my career path is another good
example of life just being weird.
And that I could have NEVER planned it.
So let me try to summarize the only advice
I can give.
First of all you need to solve the problem
of knowing what you don’t know.
I mean this with regards to technologies,
but also career options.
For example it’s good to participate in
career events at your school, watch videos
and talks on this topic, talk to your teachers.
Contact students studying at the university
you are interested in and ask about their
experience.
There are many educational programs out there
that you probably don’t know about, and
you need to research them.
See if you can do internships.
And so much more.
All of those things will increase your options
and help with your choices.
For example I hope my videos expose you to
the existence of CTF and even if you don’t
like it, at least you were aware of this option
and tried it out.
And that leads me to the second advice I often
give, and that is just have fun.
I don’t think that it really matters if
you study computer science, at university
A or B, or if you study forensics or get a
job as a web developer.
In the end I think the best thing you can
do is to choose the things that you think
will make you more happy.
If you are motivated about the degree you
choose, then you will have a lot more energy
to maybe also do stuff like CTFs on the side.
If you do something you are miserable in,
then you should see if you can somehow change
that.
I know it’s easier said than done.
But I hope you understand that I cannot give
any better advice.
You know your life best.
Self-reflect on your life and choices.
Self-reflect on your future plans.
Don’t listen to only a single person, hear
what a lot of DIFFERENT people’s experiences
are, and see what you can adapt for yourself.
That’s all I can say about having a career
in IT security.
I wish you all the best, and I really hope
you can find work that you enjoy.
