This area is protected by worldguard. 
Nobody should be able to enter. And yet,
there are people in here… as always, lot’s 
of hacking stuff is happening on this server,
but before we talk about that, let me catch you 
up on what has happened since the last episode.
I’m here at my second favorite place - the item 
sorter! It’s really complex and I didn’t quite
understand how it works. But I finally figured 
out where the design is from, it’s from Maizuma
Games. I link the channel below. I have been binge 
watching some of the design videos. Really cool
stuff. But back to this Server. Hopefully you 
remember, I had developed an anti-human plugin
that checks if the coordinates of players are 
specific strict values. This is supposed to
prevent human players from joining and only allow 
bot movements. If imprecise human movement is
detected, the player is kicked. I thought it’s 
foolproof, but turns out it’s not effective.
First of all, you can see me, I’m moving 
on the server. So I managed to bypass
it. And of course so have many others. 
The server is very active with players…
And this causes some issues. Let’s head to my 
favorite place on the server, the spawn area.
Nothing there was built by me, that’s why it’s so 
cool. on any other anarchy-like server, the spawn
is always a complete wreck. And of course we are 
getting more and more griefing attempts, BUT the
community here is defending it hard. So let’s 
do our part and help clean up some of the mess.
Griefing on this server is actually a very 
interesting topic. I don’t want to spend
time on banning people for griefing, so eventually 
it will happen. BUT usually on survival servers,
you have an extreme power imbalance between 
normal players and griefers. The griefers
join with hacked clients, they can fly around, 
speed hacks, super fast placing blocks. While the
regular players are on foot, slow, and cannot even 
attack them in the air. But on this server it’s
different. Everybody has hacks. Cleaning up the 
mess can be automated with bots and flying makes
reaching the places easy. Look at this crazy bot 
from EnderKill98 cleaning a lavacast. BUT there
is even more. Bots at spawn actually have a built 
in surveillance system that logs every valuable
block getting griefed. Let me show you. So here 
is the rainbow beacon and underneath the protected
obsidian is the actual emerald pyramid. Now let’s 
grief one of those emerald blocks. BOOM! Here the
LiveUnderflow bot, which is not me, I don’t know 
whos bot that is, it announced that LiveOverflow
broke a block of emerald at the beacon. And look 
at this. Immediately get called out “DONT EVEN
THINK ABOUT IT!”. And these messages are relayed 
to an unofficial discord server. So it doesn’t
take long and they show up to check on what the 
f’ I’m doing there. Ready to strike me down.
Also there are a few known griefers 
and here is an automated system warning
everybody that they were sighted 
near spawn. It’s crazy. I love it.
As you can see,despite no plugins against 
griefing, I think the accountability through
logs and the power for the defender also using 
hacks (or utility mods), made this spawn survive
for this long. It’s very fascinating to observe.
However the interval of griefers joining is
slowly increasing, and I wonder how 
long the spawn will be defended.
But until then, I’m just here enjoying 
the music at the concert hall. Which by
the way is another cool project from 
this server. EpicPlayerA10 improved
the notebot and the code even got merged 
into the meteor client. Love to see it.
Now on a different topic. Several players 
asked me about whether there is a way to get
a Club Mate bottle in game. Unfortunately 
there was not. So to be a good respected
leader deserving of a statue, I had 
to find a cool way to give players a
bottle. And luckily I had an idea. This is 
the story how I found a worldguard bypass.
There will be spoilers now, so if you are a player 
on the server and you want to learn something,
try it yourself first. You can always 
come back to the solution later.It’s a
lot more fun to find the bypass 
yourself. So. Anyway… let’s go.

It all started with my anti-human plugin. In the 
last episode I went over a bit of minecraft server
code to show you how the plugin event system 
works. In the anti-human plugin I register an
onplayermove event which supposedly is called 
every time a player moves. And in that code I
check if the player has human or bot movement.
But when I was reading over the event calling
code, immediately I noticed something fishy.
So this code is in the serverGamePacketListener.
this is executed everytime a 
player sends a movement packet.
And here they create the PlayerMoveEvent object 
and calls every plugin which registered to that
event. But just a few lines above this 
part there you can find this if-case.
Prevent 40 event-calls for less 
than a single pixel of movement >.>
To implement this here, they calculate a delta 
movement, basically the distance between the last
known position and the new position in the packet.
And then they only go into this if-case with the
event trigger, if the delta is large enough.
Immediately my alarm bells went off. can
we maybe move without triggering 
an event? Not enter this if case?
I guess you already know the answer… but 
before I tell you more about how it works,
let me show you the challenge I built around it.
At the coordinates 1337/1337 I created
a floating island and a small ruin.
The idea is that in this area, similar to the
anti-human check, a plugin will check if a player 
is inside this area using the onPlayerMoveEvent.
If a player is detected there, they will be 
teleported out to the floating island with a
kick message showing you exactly what the check 
is. So a very simple region protection plugin.
Now, if a player really manages 
to reach the chest in the ruin,
and interact with it, they 
will get awarded a ClubMate.
I thought the challenge was fool-proof. 
But it didn’t take long. And I had
to learn that the hard way… developing 
“protection” plugins is very difficult.
First I had to watch, in shock, that 
when players movs inside a minecart,
the playerMoveEvent is not triggered. Instead the 
onVehicleMove event is called. Okay. fine… you got
me. I gotta extend that code.
But that was not all.
Turns out that when the vehicle is not 
moving, and you just click on entering it,
your player is basically teleported into the 
minecart. Not triggering a onPlayerMove event.
Only if you ride the minecart that is triggered. 
So you can start teleporting from minecart to
minecart. Now it’s not that simple because 
moving your camera also triggers sending a
player move packet… unfortunately every typical 
cheat clients includes a feature to stop sending
out any movement packets. So now the only 
movement happening, are basically only the
server teleports when clicking on a minecart.
That’s bad… And this also lead to the next
discovery, which is enderpearls. You can also 
throw an enderpearl into the area, and it
triggers the server to teleport you. If again 
you block any other outgoing movement packets,
you can use enderpearls to move around in the 
area. Go to the chest and get a club mate.
And that was still not all. I had an actual bug 
in the code where I forgot to check the world
when opening a chest at the correct location. I 
checked that the region protection only applies
to the overworld, but I forgot that with 
the chest reward. So players figured out
they can place chests on the nether roof 
and started farming club mate bottles.
Goddamit. WHY IS IT SO HARD TO IMPLEMENT 
A BASIC REGION PROTECTION PLUGIN?!
But at this point, too many players were able to 
bypass my plugin without the intended solution,
and lots of club mate bottles 
were out there in the world.
Kinda sucked to be honest, but that’s 
also fair game on a server for hackers.
However it was not all a bad 
experience. Because Philip,
as well as Gildfesh and Ada, two very well 
known and experienced minecraft hackers,
they solved it the intended way. So it’s 
true. There is a way to move in minecraft,
without triggering the move event on the server. 
And the crazy thing? Gildfesh and Ada immediately
knew how to solve it, because as it turns out, 
the issue wasn’t new. But more on that later.
So after this failed attempt of creating 
a cool challenge, I decided to look around
some more. Being able to not trigger the 
event handler seems to be something that
could be a big issue for many plugins. So I 
started to look into some region protection
plugins. The first one being WorldGuard. Maybe 
they solve the other issues of ender pearls,
carts and animals. But still have the player 
move event issue. I open up the code and take
a look how its implemented. And it’s right 
there. They use the onPlayerMove event. Mh.
So I setup a test world and installed 
worldguard. Defined a region with a
flag to prevent players from entering. You 
can see. I cannot walk towards Herobrine.
But let me show you my exploit. Do you 
see this? I’m able to walk towards him…
almost there… let’s try to kill him. But well… 
that doesn’t work because of the disabled PVP in
the area. But point being. I WALKED OVER THERE!
How did I do it? I’m sure you noticed the
flashing screen when executing the 
bug and that has a good reason.
So let’s go back to the code. For every 
move packet, the server calculates here
the distance between the old known position and 
the new position in the packed. If it’s small,
it doesn’t trigger the event.
So it seems simple to just move
very very very slowly. BUT actually that doesn’t 
work. Because this lastPosition is only updated
if the delta was large enough. Which means when 
you slowly move lastPosition stays the same. And
eventually you will have moved far enough for the 
delta to become too large. Triggering the event.
But immediately I thought… well… I can 
just disconnect and reconnect again,
right? Just walk a few tiny steps less 
than delta, logout. Login. Everything
will be reset again and I can walk 
another tiny bit. This should work.
And this was enough for me to think of 
building the first challenge. There is
definitely a legit way to walk tiny 
bits without triggering the event.
But after playing around with it a bit more, 
another thought came to my head. If you send an
invalid move packet, for example when you try 
to move very far away, the server will reset
your position with a teleport. This effectively 
works like the relog. It will reset everything.
And that’s why you see me flashing. I always 
move a tiny bit, and then try to move very
far away, triggering a teleport back to the 
current position, and move forward again.
So all that is left, you just have to write some
code around this and then you 
can move in a protected area.
Crazy! So I decided the worldguard bypass 
to become another challenge. I went onto the
server and started building ruins near the spawn. 
Inside of it is a club mate fountain. Which is a
lava pool and the goal is to die in there. And 
the area is obviously protected by worldguard.
I thought this looks really cool, but people 
started messing with it and flooded it over night,
turning lava into obsidian, and I didn’t want 
to turn on fluid protection in worldguard due
to performance hits. So I moved the 
ruins to almost build-height up in
the sky as a floating island instead.
But what do players get when they solve
it? Because everybody got Club Mate bottles at 
this point, I had to think of another reward.
So I implemented a name prefix. If you bypass 
worldguard and die in the club mate fountain,
you get awarded the HACKER prefix. And you 
can see many people on the server have it.t.
It was very cool to see how they slowly the 
players figured it out. Also my solution is
pretty bad. It works, but It’s very slow. But 
some others really started optimziing and getting
every little piece out they can. Look how fast 
Jerrylum is walking through the area. It’s crazy.
And here is Philip, he was one of the 
first people to solve the challenge as
well. And it was also really fun to watch 
him optimizing his bypass over time.
Amazing.
So is this a serious 0day worldguard 
bypass? Well I already mentioned that
the issue is not a 0day. Gildfesh 
showed me this hackerforums thread.
From 2016… Minecratf 1.9. Fly 
bypass [Almost Any AntiCheat].
And see what they write here:
Basically you can move <0.0626,
since it won't fire any events. Then you teleport 
into a block or the void, to reset your position.
Then move <0.0626 again. The whole process doesn't 
fire ANY events, and you can move anyway you want.
It’s exactly the issue I discovered 
when reading over the plugin code.
You can see, this issue is, or was known 
in the minecraft cheating community since
2016. So how come worldguard 
is not patched against this?
Or why has paper not patched it?
I have a few thoughts about that.
First, the impact for world guard is not 
that bad. Areas are still protected from
griefing and PVPs, it’s just an entering 
bypass… That’s not too bad to be honest.
But besides worldguard, of course it 
might bypass some basic anticheat plugins,
but also the flight is very slow. The 
negative impact is probably not that high.
But what about paper directly?
Of course the whole delta calculation
could be removed and an event triggered on 
every move packet. They claim it has a negative
performance impact, but this is definitely 
something that could be checked. How often
are these tiny movements even happening during 
regular play. So maybe paper could put this behind
a config variable whether to always trigger 
the event or allow changing the delta amount.
Another fix idea might be to make the server reset 
teleports to go back to the lastPos, if they are
set, instead of the current player coordinates.
But in the end the server maintainers,
who are a lot more experienced with the 
code and know what else might break,
they have to decide if they fix it, or not.
And not fixing it, I think is totally fine.
It’s probably not a serious issue if it has 
existed already for over 6 years. But if the
community decides to not patch it,I think it 
must be very clearly documented that this is a
potential issue. Plugin developers need to know 
about these details so they can make sure they
design their plugins around this. And so here I 
did my part. Hope now more people know about it.
Cool! We found a worldguard bypass. so this is the 
end of my video. But the more I spend time with
this project, the moret I realized there are so 
many amazing projects happening on this server,
and I want to give players a chance to showcase 
what they have done. And in this episode I
introduce you to DarkReaper. He started on the 
wrong side. He joined the server and started
griefing. BUT he really came around and tries 
to be a very productive member of the community
now. And I very much appreciate that. And that’s 
why he will be the first showcase. Take it away.
