Hey, some of you asked how I make my videos.
So I want to take you along the process of
creating one of my episodes.
I know that some parts could be more efficient
if I would know better tools.
So while I obviously would like to show you
how I create videos, I’m also looking forward
to get some tips and tricks how to do things
differently.
And maybe become more efficient or create
more beautiful videos.
The video creation process can be divided
in 3 big steps.
Write the script.
Record screen footage, fix mistakes in the
script, and then record the audio.
And finally, as last step, edit the whole
video and draw all the graphics.
Ok.
First step is researching and writing the
script.
Usually I start by opening up a google docs
and start writing.
And then I get into a research, try it, write
it - loop.
In this case I make the second episode about
the dlmalloc heap unlink exploit.
Which is heavily based on phrack issue number
57 article “once upon a free()” and “vudo
malloc tricks”.
In the last video we developed our own exploit
for unlink which won’t work because of null-bytes,
so I thought as a narrative for this video,
it would be cool to just explore what the
researchers back then discovered and expose
my audience to the true heroes from hacking
history.
So I reread what they were writing back then
and try to think about how I could present
it in a video.
The key lesson from this video will be about
setting the size of the heap chunk to a value
that doesn’t contain 0-bytes, which seems
huge at first, but you can abuse the fact
how negative numbers work.
While writing the script I always read it
out loud to see how it flows, and then make
changes to it.
At this point I may also fire up the exploit-exercises
protostar VM and try it out.
Just to make sure I get it right.
Usually I will catch some mistakes in my script
now and modify it.
Once I’m confident I got everything working,
I make notes of the commands I’m going to
use and put them on a second monitor.
For this particular video this first part
of researching, writing the script and trying
it out, took me roughly 3 hours.
Next step is recording the exploit development.
To record my screen I use OBS and a lower
framerate.
Because high framerates are not really necessary
and it makes the files smaller, so easier
to work with and store.
For this particular video there will be quite
a big chunk just explaining stuff with figures.
So the practical part that I have to record
is not too long.
And with my notes and the script it should
be done quickly.
If I make mistakes during recording I either
decide to incorporate them into the script,
because I like to have them as a learning
opportunity.
Or I have to redo the segment.
During recording I realized that I should
change some of the text, so I refine the script
again.
Now I open up my little template that has
the intro and outro in it and record the audio
of the script.
This whole part of recording the video screen
footage and the audio, with refining the script
took in this case maybe 1h.
The practical part was not too long.
Next up is editing the stuff with all the
graphics.
That’s the most tedious part.
After my first couple of videos I really wanted
to add more visuals.
An arrow or a box around something important
goes a long way in my opinion.
You find some older videos of mine where I
tried to do this with editing directly in
Sony Vegas.
But that was super slow and looked crap.
I have not that much experience with video
editing, so the only thing I knew I could
do easily would be to get a graphics tablet
and draw them by hand.
The process is simple, I can take a screenshot
of the current scene in vegas, paste it into
photoshop, draw the overlay on a new layer,
save only that layer and put it onto the video
timeline.
This is what I do with any graphic.
It’s fairly quick and I kinda like the resulting
art style.
After the editing, which in this case took
like 4 hours, I render the video and upload
it.
So creating this one episode took about 8
hours.
Sprinkle some procrastination in there, and
I will be busy a whole day.
See you next time, for another technical video
