I couldn’t remember who I was or where I was 
going. All I had was a feeling that drew me into
this direction and so I kept walking and swimming. 
Survival was my top priority. But once a while I
got flashes of memory of what had happened to me.
I remembered falling out of the
sky. Probably lost consciousness from the impact.
But I had no time to question it. It was night,
monsters everywhere and I had no shelter.
Eventually I reached a shore and using my
bare hands I used the tree to craft a boat.
It was peaceful on the sea, and so I had
more time to think about what had happened.
Another memory. There were people around me.
They were floating. And they watched me 
while I was carried by a weird machine.
Who were they?
I kept sailing through
the night until the next morning. Finally 
it was safe to gather some food, cook my
first meal and upgrade my tools. Eventually 
I continued my journey and I was wondering
about the bottle I carried with me. This is the 
only thing I had in my posession after the fall.
It started raining. And the lush oak trees 
turned into dark forest. It was scary,
but I had no choice but to follow 
the urge and keep on going.
But then. A blue light in the distance. The 
feeling inside of me got stronger. I climbed up
the mountain getting closer and closer. It looks 
like a lantern. And a chest. What could it be.
Eventually I reached it. I opened the 
chest. There was Club Mate. Everything
rushed back to me! I REMEMBERED!
During a concert I fell asleep and
they kidnapped me with a flying machine. They 
didn’t want me anymore so they sent me off
into the distance. I kept flying and flying 
until. Until… Until the world turned upside
down. The world seemed to suddenly change 
and I found myself falling out of the sky.
But now I’m here. I remember my powers. I remember 
what I’m capable of. So I will rebuild my kingdom
right here. This is my new place. You wonder where 
I am? Here are my coordinates. Come and find me.

You know what. All those players who kicked me 
out and made me come all the way here, they are
going to suffer. This is now a 1.19.2 server. 
All your hacks will become useless. And the
old server will become HELL. For that I created 
a basic server plugin that when players move,
will fling TNT into random directions. This way 
I can destroy ALL OF THEIR beautiful builds.
Look at it. How confused they are about what 
is happening?! All the time they invested into
building this place. And I will take 
it away within minutes. Enjoy hell…
But I’m here now. And I gotta say. I love 
this place, I think I can build something
really cool on these thin floating pillars. And 
deep down some more secrets are waiting for us.
But before we try to go there, let’s setup camp.
On the long walk here I gathered a few materials,
so we can already place down a crafting table, get 
a bed and use an oven to cook some of the meat.
Now where do we go from here? The area 
looks amazing. I love the change of
scenery from the previous area. Lots of 
mountains. And a village on the horizon.
So let’s start with the basic game 
loop. Cutting down trees to gather wood,
setup chests, and maybe mine some coal and 
iron. This is always the most relaxing and
enjoyable part in minecraft for me. 
The start of a new world. So join me.

As you can see I’m using my fly-hack to get 
around. But as you know, I’m not using a hacked
client I downloaded somewhere. Actually we we 
figured out how to bypass the anti-flight check
of the server in episode 4 of this series. But 
since then I actually changed the way how I do
it. Back then I fully coded the movement. 
I look at the key presses and then modify
the velocity and movement of the player.
But you know how the fly hack looks now?
It’s so much simpler. It’s just one line. 
client.player.getAbilities().allowFlying = true;
So during this whole project at some 
point I realized that setting this,
it’s basically giving the player the 
ability to fly like in creative mode.
Which makes it so much easier for me not to 
handle each key press and it feels a lot more
familiar. But of course this only has effect 
on the client side. The game client thinks
we are in creative fly mode basically. Which 
means we still need a bypass for the anti-fly
kick. Quick refresher, the minecraft server 
counts for how long you have been floating,
kicking you when a threshold is reached. But 
when sending a brief movement packet downwards,
as if you were falling, it resets this counter.
I used to do it by setting the player position
lower directly, but now I’m actually just 
sending a spoofed movement packet with this
lowered position. To send this packet I 
created this PacketHelper class that uses
a ClientConnectionInvoker mixin to access the 
private sendImmediatly method. This can be used
to just send any minecraft packet to the server. 
immediatly. Seeing this it still feels like magic
to me. I mean not the flying, I mean being able 
to access a private method of the connection
class. But we know already how it works because 
I introduced how modding works in episode 3 and
there I also explained how mixins work. So this 
ClientConenctionInvoker mixin exposes the private
method now. Anyway. As you can see, I use what 
I learned over time and keep improving my hacks.
After I gathered a lot of stuff like diamonds 
and even netherite I wanted to really start
working on the base. And the first thing 
I thought about building was an iron farm.
Look what I found! I was looking for open 
mineshafts to find name tags in chests. I
need that for the zombie in the iron farm 
and came across a woodland mansion. Now
that we are on 1.19 I had to kidnap an allay.
Well, in the back you can also see that slowly
the iron farm is coming together. Unfortunately 
I had some failures along the way. like the first
time I got a zombie the villagers got 
scared and jumped to their death. Oops.
But eventually I got a working farm. Iron golems 
spawn at the top in the water get flushed down
and fall into a lava kill room. Awesome. But 
I know you don’t care about normal minecraft.
So let’s talk about another hack of mine.
If you carefully watched the episodes you might
remember that I created an XRay mod, but then 
never really used it afterwards. The reason for
that was, that it was incompatible with Optifine. 
Optifine is a mod to have fancy shaders and better
performance. So it messes with the way how blocks 
are drawn. And my Xray mod was basically a Block
mixin that hooks the shouldDrawSide method. And 
returns true or false if the current block is
an important block.
But that simple
solution didn’t work with optifine.
Now with the change to 1.19.2, I also switched
from optifine over to sodium + iris, another combo 
for performance and shaders. But it still broke my
xray mod. But this time I was motivated to try 
to make my Xray work. But how would I do that?
Well! Xray how I want to do it, I basically just 
want to tell the game which blocks to draw or not.
Somehow the game has to know that Air blocks 
are not drawn, glass blocks are translucent,
and stone blocks are solid. So I started 
looking into the iris and sodium source-code
to see how they mess with blocks. Maybe I could 
figure out why my simple mixin doesn’t work.
And I started searching for shouldDrawSide, 
because it’s the only related method I knew.
And in the sodium code I stumbled over the 
BlockRender class, which does sound very
related. And it calls this shouldDrawSide method. 
Following it it leads to a BlockOcclusionCache.
So occlusion means that something is covering 
something else. Meaning the block behind other
blocks don’t need to be rendered. And cache 
means it’s storing that occlusion information.
So maybe if I could figure out how to make this 
shouldDrawSide return true or false depending on
the block type, maybe I could get xray to work.
So I started going over all the code paths that
return true and false. Is there maybe a way 
how I could control these return results. For
example to return a false, all I had to do is 
to make isSideInvisible return true. And this
is called on the selfState, which is a BlockState 
object. And we can create a mixin for BlockState.
So here it is. Here I have a new mixin 
for BlockState and it hooks into the
isSideInvisible function and it returns false 
for all the important blocks. And return true
for all the unimportant blocks. So 
their sides should be invisible.
And that’s basically the process I continued for a 
little bit, trying to control as much as I could,
for example down here the isSolid method. I also 
overwrote this one. And I did this for a few
other interesting methods I discovered this way. 
Including luminance and ambient occlusion which
controls how bright or dark blocks are drawn.
In the end, I got a working Xray mod. Compatible
with sodium and iris. I was so proud of myself 
and of course I started using it right away.
So that’s what you saw in the footage 
when I hunted for diamonds and netherite.
We are making good progress here, but of course 
we still have a long way ahead of us. And in the
background you can see another project of 
mine. I needed wheat for breeding animals,
as well as carrots and potatoes to trade with 
villagers for emeralds. So for that I cleared
out an area for farming! And let me show you 
how it works. here, all the crops are grown.
Aaaaand. Check this out. Farming goes brrrrrrr.
This is another hack *cough* I mean utility
mod I added. It’s super simple. On each tick I 
scan blocks around me and try to plant a crop.
This actually means that we check 
if the block is farmland and then
we try to use a seed we either 
hold in our main or off-hand.
And in here it checks if we are holding wheat, 
beetroot, potato, carrots and so forth, and then
calls interactBlock trying to use the seed on 
the farmland. Super simple but effective. I can
just run through here and crops get automatically 
replanted, as long as I hold a seed in my hand.
You can see I have been busy, but I have done 
much more and I don’t want to split up the video,
so let me actually summarize all the stuff I made.
When I was using my xray mod to look for diamonds
I actually came across a mob spawner and in order 
to prepare for enchanted tools with mending and so
forth I wanted a small XP farm. So I transformed 
this mob spawner into a basic mob farm.
I then also later upgraded it trying 
to get more XP by adding a regular mob
spawner area above it. I dug trenches with 
trapdoors trying to flush the mobs down. I
also went around and tried to place 
torches in some of the caves nearby,
trying to increase the spawn rate in that dark 
place. It helped but it wasn’t super effective.
Now back to the main base, I also wanted to add a 
second iron farm to increase the iron production
rate, and I built it right below the previous 
farm. Which I later realized that it was kinda
dumb, because I watched a video about irongolem 
spawning rules and the villagers down there
might see the iron golem falling from the top and 
then not spawn their own. Anyway, it exists now.
I then also added a kelp farm because 
I wanted to produce kelp blocks for
furnaces as well as maybe get a bit more 
XP this way. At first it was very small,
but then I expanded it a little bit. Yeah. I 
always tried to kinda integrate it into the rocks.
Similarly I also wanted to add a sugarcane 
farm which I added into another pillar,
but this time a bit further up and floating.
On top of the pillars I also started to add 
a new island where I wanted to place two
villagers to get some first enchanted book 
trades. Mainly I wanted mending. Searching
for mending books is pretty annoying, so I 
actually wrote another utility mod for that.
Let me first show it in action.
When I destroy the lectern it
will automatically place a lectern again, then 
check the trades and print them below. If I’m
not satisfied I simply destroy the lectern again, 
and it automatically places and checks it again.
So it’s still a little bit of a manual 
process, but it’s much faster than always
checking the trade menu yourself.
The code for that is incredibly
ugly, but let me show you. I have a simple 
state machine, and we first start by scanning
for librarians nearby. So if we find a librarian, 
meaning a lectern must have been placed and turned
that villager into a librarian, then we call 
interactEntity onto that villager and go into the
WAITING_FOR_TRADEOFFERS state. So this basically 
clicks on the librarian to open the menu.
But now we have to go into 
the ClientConnection Mixin,
because here we are waiting for a tradeoffer 
packet. If we receive a trade offer packet and
we are in the WAITING_FOR_TRADEOFFERS state, we 
can then print the enchanted book the villager
offers. Additionally we also cancel the trade 
offer packet, as well as the open screen packet,
because We only want to extract the book the 
villager offers for trading. And display it
as text. we don’t want the client to 
show us the actual trade menu window.
Then next game tick comes and we are back in 
the main mod code. So when we got an offer,
now we actually wait for the villager to 
lose the profession again. So if we are
not satisfied with the book we got, 
we can now break the lectern again,
which takes the profession away, triggers 
this code, which immediately places down
a new lectern. Which restarts the chain.
If the villager turns into a librarian again,
we interact with them again to get 
the trade offers, check the book,
and wait for the lectern to be destroyed again.
Very ugly, but effective. Basically just keep
breaking the lectern until the text 
shows mending. Or whatever you need.
Unfortunately I realized that the mob spawner 
XP farm is just too slow to repair myself and
to enchant items on the enchantment table. So I 
wanted to build a XP farm in the nether. This is
the first time I’m doing this, so I looked 
again for tutorials and watched Rays Works
video on an AFK XP farm. basically I adapted 
this design. You will see mine looks similar
but I tried to understand how it works 
and simplify it for my basic needs. For
example I don’t need the piglin bartering.
To build this I had to collect a lot of magma
blocks, but that turned out to be quite easy. But 
it was really nice to have a fly hack to build
the farm because obviously standing on the magma 
blocks to build the platform doesn’t work well.
It took a few iterations and experiments, but 
eventually it seemed to work well. Here it is. So
I have this zombified piglin with a nametag nearby 
which is kinda the “memory” for the aggression
towards me. Then I hit some other piglin, they 
will tell eachother that I’m evil now and I
can go to the middle. Now they keep spawning, 
walking towards me, falling down a trap where then
minecarts kill the piglins due to entity cramming. 
And because they were trying to attack me,
I get XP for it. This is a super powerful farm 
and I don’t know why I never built this before.
Maybe an enderman farm in the end is even 
better, but this one here is an AFK farm AND
I’m like SOOOO far away from the next stronghold. 
So I couldn’t even go to the end if I wanted to.
I guess that’s all I have. This is how far I 
have gotten. And luckily nobody has disturbed
me here yet. Probably thanks to my advanced 
position protection system. Aka texture rotation.
In the last episode I actually hid a little teaser 
for this episode in the description giving people
the challenge to find me. And I followed some of 
their progress and coordinated cracking attempts.
But nobody seemed to notice in my hacked mod 
menu, “texture rotation”. This should tell
them they cannot just bruteforce my location.
Look, let me quickly turn texture rotation on
and off… do you get excited now? Leaking the 
real rotation? No way! You wont get it this easy.
Let me actually create a quick superflat test 
world to show it in action. I also placed some
grass so you can see that effect as well. Now when 
I change the texture rotation state in the menu,
you can see that several textures change.
In episode 9 of this series I learned about
cracking coordinates from texture rotations and 
I showed you the responsible code. This hashCode
function returns a seed given a x,y, z location, 
which is then used to decide how to rotate the
specific texture. So I just created a mixin that 
changes these values. You will never find me here.
Besides the new base location I also changed 
the server IP again I mentioned at the
beginning that on the day of the switch, 
I installed a plugin on the old server
that keeps spawning TNT. It was kinda fun 
to watch this initial destruction. But I
haven’t looked at it in a few weeks, 
so lets see how the server looks now.
Wow… it’s almost not recognizable anymore. This 
is the spawn area. And flying up to my base,
it’s crazy. It really looks insane. Over there 
the roller coaster. The sorter. Dammmn. But it’s
time to shut off this server now, because this 
costs me 70Eur a month and running two servers
in parallel is just a bit too expensive. 
Byebye original 1.18 world. Welcome 1.19.
So far I have been undisturbed in my base. But 
you should really try to find it, I’m really far,
believe me. But it will be worth it. because there 
are some secrets hiding deep below this base.
Now one
last thing. Like last episode I also wanted to 
showcase some community projects. Now that there
is a new server IP, players had to start looking 
for it again and I received many messages with
various scanning projects. Here some clips from 
Cheesburger implementing a server scanner in Rust.
Or here, the stats from a scanner by Nocturne. 
Ever wondered how many active minecraft servers
and active players there are? How many servers 
are online or offline mode. Or historical data,
how did the amount of active servers 
and players change over time.
For example this spike here is early 
August, which should be around the 1.19.2
release. Which apparently made people 
want to start new minecraft servers.
Besides scanning, I also received several mod 
showcases, people sharing their own hacking
mods. Here are some clips from AliFurkan. For 
me, the most interesting part is always to see
what kind of system they are using. Like, 
what is this resolution and task bar? And
also you can see they host their own internal 
git repositories, here their worldguard bypass
project. It’s just really fun to see how much 
effort everybody puts into their own hacks.
Just FYI, I received several showcase submissions. 
And unfortunately I cannot show everybody at the
same time, sometimes I also forget, I’m sorry, 
or sometimes you might showcase something I don’t
want to share just yet. There are quite some 
spoilers in some of the submitted videos. I’m
sorry about that, believe me I don’t leave 
you out intentionally. It’s mostly random.
I love everybody who is motivated enough 
to submit something. Thank you so much.
Anyway… Let’s get to another full showcase. 
actually there was kind of a “war” on the
server between bots and players. Philip, the 
owner of NoobBot actually tried to implement
an artificial whitelist. The idea is to 
fill up all slots of the server with bots,
and only leave when an allowed player either joins 
a specific proxy or hits an API endpoint. Then the
bot leaves and opens up a spot. It was an attempt 
to block griefers from joining, but lots of other
players hated the system because they couldn’t 
join. So LeBogo implemented his own placeholder
bot. He kept a bot around that leaves to open up 
a slot when he wants to join. So take it away.
