Do you need to know how to program, in order 
to get into hacking, or having a career in
IT security? My personal opinion and short answer 
is “yes”, but there is more I want to talk about.
Reality is a bit messy and the 
long answer is “it depends”.
So let’s explore a few thoughts about this.
As you hopefully know, recently I made videos 
about SerenityOS, specifically looking at kernel
security issues. And if you follow me on twitter, 
you might have seen me retweeting several videos
Andreas Kling made about other vulnerabilities 
in SerenityOS where he even develops exploits for
them. They are amazing, check them out. So Andreas 
Kling clearly has the knowledge and skills to find
kernel vulnerabilities AND write exploits 
for them. It seems even very easy for him.
So if YOU want to get to that same 
level, you might ask yourself:
“how can I get there?! How to learn all 
those skills?! Are there courses I can buy?!”
I mean, you might want to watch more 
liveoverflow videos and checkout
the binary exploitation playlist and 
CTF writeups. Sure… that might help.
But let’s specifically look at Andreas' 
experience and try to figure out how he
got those skills - maybe you can copy it. If 
you map Andreas’s experience on a timeline,
then for basically all his life he was doing 
programming. He worked as a developer for Nokia
and Apple. He worked on WebKit, the browser 
engine. Here a random webkit blogpost from 2013,
and see the author? It’s andreas! Then in 2018, 
he started programming his own operating system
Serenity OS, and now just here at the end, 
he did vulnerability and exploitation stuff.
Without specifically learning it. His many 
years of programming lover level code,
which of course also means tons of time spent 
debugging weird functionality bugs, investigating
crashes, understanding how memory and assembly 
works, and so forth. Through programming he
acquired ALL THE SKILLS needed to just switch 
over to do some hacking. Just like that.
And I think if you want to do this kind of system 
exploitation, If you are aiming for understanding
or even creating jailbreaks, browser exploits, 
and all that other cool exploitation stuff,
I don’t think you get away without 
programming. You either already have
programming experience in your past, or 
you have to acquire it along the way.
And that makes sense, right? 
If you want to exploit a C++
program, it makes sense that you 
need to know the C++ language.
Mh... okay... But then there is this 
curious case of web security. If you
listen to various bug hunter interviews, 
there are quite a few successful hackers,
who say they don’t have programming experience. 
And while I cannot fully understand that,
because I do come from a programming 
background, I can see why that can work.
There are a lot of tools to perform web 
hacking and you don’t really need coding.
You can use Burp to manipulate HTTP requests. You 
can use SQLmap to exploit a SQL Injection without
knowing the SQL language. You can bruteforce 
parameters and API paths with stuff like ffuf.
You can copy & paste XSS payloads and hope to 
see an alert() popup. And then there are even
full vulnerability scanners 
like Burp or Acunetix or so,
where you just press a button, and then you take 
the result and sell it as an overpriced pentest
report. You can do a ton of web hacking 
without actually knowing programming.
And being “successful” in it. At least in 
the financial success sense. To me that
is not very satisfying and boring. It’s not 
how I measure “success”. But doesn’t matter.
So I was wondering. If system exploitation 
clearly requires programming knowledge. And
web hacking does not necessarily 
need it. What is the difference?
Usually I say, if you want to exploit 
a C program, you should know C. If you
exploit a php website, you should know 
php. In some abstract way you can say:
“you need to know the language of your target”.
But web apps have one big difference to a local
C program. The web has a standardized protocol. A 
standard language EACH web app speaks. It doesn’t
matter if the web app is developed in php, python, 
java or even C, in the end they all have to speak
HTTP. But that’s not all. Every USER of 
webapps uses a standardized tool to access
those apps - namely the browser. So different 
languages can cause the same kind of issue,
and you can write tools to look for those issues. 
Regardless if it’s server-side attacks like SQL
injections or logic flaws, or client-side 
attacks like CSRF or XSS. Those issues have
all one thing in common. And that is they exist 
in the standardized ecosystem of the web. So a
web hacker doesn’t necessarily have to understand 
the programming languages behind it. It’s enough
to speak the first layer of languages, the web 
protocols and understanding the web ecosystem.
For system exploitation or binary 
exploitation this is what is different.
Every program written is different and has 
a different way of interacting with it.
Exploiting sudo is different 
than exploiting the kernel.
But does that also mean, if you want to 
do web hacking programming is useless?
No. Absolutely not. There will always be issues 
that depend on the language or frameworks used.
And so understanding how a website is built 
will always expand the possible issues you
might think or know about. I also think 
it helps with the creativity of hacking,
because programming is in my opinion a creative 
thing. And of course if you know programming,
you can also write your own tools and 
scanners to help you do a better job.
But everything I talked about until now, is a 
very specific area of IT security. It’s really the
industry of bug bounty, vulnerability research, 
code audits, application security and so forth.
But IT security is much larger than that. There 
are TONS of jobs, maybe even the majority of jobs,
that do not require this deep technical 
knowledge. Doing like Network,
firewall and VPN installations, working in a SOC 
(security operations center), triaging reports,
doing security awareness against phishing, doing 
checklist ISO certifications, or even classical
pentest where you scan networks with tools. All 
that stuff doesn’t require programming knowledge.
But you know this channel, this channel is not 
about this weird enterprise world of “security”,
I wanna make videos about “hacking” 
in the classical sense. I want to
explore systems and understand 
everything on a deeper level.
That’s what makes me excited. And 
I think that area of IT security
does require programming experience.
And that’s why for me IT security is
never an entry level position. For me IT security 
is a specialization in IT and builds on top of a
general broader IT foundation. That’s also why I 
am sceptical about IT security bachelor degrees.
Anyway. One last call to action. I think for 
anybody who doesn’t know programming yet,
if they can read tons of different examples why 
people got into programming and what others can
recommend, that is super helpful. So please share 
your programming motivation and experience in the
comments. I’m sure it will help a lot of people 
to find a cool project to start programming.
