Hey,
You are probably watching this video because
you know that I create educational videos
about IT security, and you are thinking about
supporting this project.
For that already I want to say thank you.
But let me explain everything.
So the first problem is to decide between,
monthly, or a per video/per creation, support.
That’s why I decided to go with both.
On youtube you can find the Join button which
allows you to support me with a fixed monthly
amount - it’s roughly 5$.
On Patreon on the other hand you can pledge
money per video, but you also have the option
to set an upper LIMIT per month.
Both options have advantages and disadvantages
which I want to quickly explain.
With a monthly pledge you provide some income
stability.
Much more like a regular job.
With this I also hope I could receive ongoing
support if for example I get sick or just
need a break, or want to take more time for
a really good video.
On the other hand we have patreon with a per
video support.
Certain dollar amounts per video sound high
but you can intelligently use the monthly
limit to clearly communicate what you want.
For example.
You could pledge like 2$ per video, but set
a 10$ monthly limit, which means you like
to just see more videos, up to five a month.
That means less effort, but more output.
For example basic tutorial series.
But if you would pledge 10$ with a 10$ limit,
then you clearly tell me: “take your time,
I rather would have one single high quality
in-depth video per month”.
So this allows me to clearly justify how many
days of work should go into a particular video.
Up until now I think I have never skipped
a week for a video.
Not during any holidays, crazy work weeks,
vacations or when I got sick.
AND there were weeks with bonus videos.
So it’s understandable that you as a monthly
supporter might expect I deliver every week.
But.
I have dealt with this stress for a long time
now, and I actually would like to not feel
this stress anymore.
So keep in mind that a video every week is
not a guarantee.
However with a per video pledge I would only
receive money if I make videos, so then it’s
no problem.
And this leads me to expectations in general.
when somebody pledges 5$ per video, and then
I publish a video about a boring topic, or
I cut a CTF video write-up into multiple parts,
they might feel cheated out of 5$.
So… this is very important.
before you support me in any way, be it monthly,
or be it per video, I want to make it clear,
please don’t have any expectations.
I’m already extremely stressed out by trying
to balance what are essentially two full-time
jobs.
I really cannot add more stress in my life
by having possibly hundreds of people with
even more expectations.
So please only click on the Join button if
you think the LiveOverflow channel has retroactively
qualified for your support, by having released
hundreds of videos in the past.
And please go check them out, I think there
are a many great ones that so few people have
seen because they are older.
So… whatever you will decide, thanks for
even considering supporting LiveOverflow.
Oh and also, if you are a student or you don’t
have the means to spend a few dollars, that
is totally fine and that’s why I try to
keep videos free in the first place.
However if you are an overpaid security professional,
sysadmin or developer and my videos have helped
you in your job or career, you know… it
would be nice.
To summarize, sorry for the underwhelming
rewards structure.
What an amazing sales pitch, right!
Bit I just don’t want to promise anything
and then disappoint.
So let’s see how this goes, this is an experiment
for me and I’m sure things will evolve and
change over time.
